 
Commission for the Conservation of 
Southern Bluefin Tuna 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Report of the Twelfth Annual Meeting 
of the Commission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 October 2005 
Narita, Japan 
 
1 
Report of the Twelfth Annual Meeting of the Commission 
15 October 2005 
Narita, Japan 
 
Agenda Item 1. 
Opening of meeting 
1.1 Welcoming address 
1. 
The Chair (Mr Yoshimi Suenaga, Japan) welcomed participants and opened the 
meeting. 
 
1.2 Adoption of agenda 
2. 
The agenda was adopted and is included at Appendix 1. 
3. 
The list of meeting participants is included at Appendix 2. 
 
Agenda Item 2. 
Approval of decisions taken by the Extended Commission 
4. 
The Commission approved the decisions taken by the Extended Commission for the 
Twelfth Meeting of the Commission, which is at Appendix 3. 
 
Agenda Item 3. 
Election of the Chair and Vice-Chair for CCSBT 13 and venue 
5. 
CCSBT 13 will be hosted and chaired by Japan.  Japan indicated it would nominate a 
person in 2006 prior to CCSBT13. 
6. 
The Vice Chair will be nominated by Australia. 
7. 
CCSBT 13 will be held on 10-13 October 2006 at Miyazaki, Japan. 
 
Agenda Item 4. 
Other business 
8. 
There was no other business. 
 
Agenda Item 5. 
Adoption of report of meeting 
9. 
The report was adopted. 
 
Agenda Item 6. 
Close of meeting 
10. The meeting closed at 2.30 pm, 15 October 2005.
2 
List of Appendices 
 
Appendix 
 
1 
Agenda 
2 
List of Participants 
3  
Report of the Extended Commission for the Twelfth Annual Meeting of 
the Commission 
 
 
 
Appendix 1 
 
 
Agenda 
Twelfth Annual Meeting of the Commission 
15 October 2005 
Narita, Japan 
 
 
 
1. 
Opening of the meeting 
 
 
 
 
1.1 Welcoming address 
 
 
 
 
1.2 Adoption of agenda 
 
 
2. 
Approval of decisions taken by the Extended Commission 
 
 
3. 
Election of the Chair and Vice Chair for CCSBT13 and venue 
 
 
4. 
Other business 
 
 
5. 
Adoption of report of meeting 
 
 
6. 
Close of meeting 
 
 
Appendix 2 
 
List of Participants 
Twelfth Annual Meeting of the Commission 
15 October 2005 
Narita, Japan 
 
CHAIR 
 
Mr Yoshimi SUENAGA  
Councillor 
Fisheries Agency of Japan 
1-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100-8907 
Phone: +81 3 3591 2045 
Fax: 
+81 3 3502 0571 
Email: yoshimi_suenaga@nm.maff.go.jp 
 
 
AUSTRALIA 
 
Mr Glenn HURRY 
A/g Executive Manager 
Fisheries & Forestry 
Dept. of Agriculture, Fisheries & Forestry 
GPO Box 858, Canberra ACT 2601 
Phone: +61 2 6272 5777 
Fax: 
+61 2 6272 4875 
Email: Glenn.Hurry@daff.gov.au 
 
Mr Stephen ROWCLIFFE 
International Fisheries 
Dept. of Agriculture, Fisheries & Forestry 
GPO Box 858, Canberra ACT 2601 
Phone: +61 2 6272 3871 
Fax: 
+61 2 6272 4875 
Email: Stephen.Rowcliffe@daff.gov.au 
 
Mr Philip KIMPTON 
Executive Officer 
Dept. of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
R G Casey Building 
John McEwen Crescent 
Phone: +61 2 6261 3124 
Fax: 
+61 2 6261 2144 
Email: Philip.Kimpton@dfat.gov.au 
 
 
 
 
 
JAPAN 
 
Mr Takaaki SAKAMOTO 
Assistant Director 
Fisheries Agency of Japan 
1-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100-8907 
Phone: +81 3 3591 1086 
Fax: 
+81 3 3502 0571 
Email: takaaki_sakamoto@nm.maff.go.jp 
 
Mr Hideto WATANABE 
Fisheries Division 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
2-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100-8917 
Phone: +81 3 5501 8338 
Fax: 
+81 3 5501 8332 
Email: hideo.watanabe@mofa.go.jp 
 
 
NEW ZEALAND 
 
Ms Emma WATERHOUSE 
Senior Adviser 
Ministry of Fisheries 
PO Box 1020, Wellington 
Phone: +64 4 470 2644 
Fax: 
+64 4 470 2596 
Email: emma.waterhouse@fish.govt.nz 
 
 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA 
 
Mr. Ki Hiok BARNG 
Director General 
Ministry of Maritime Affairs and Fisheries 
140-2 Gye-Dong, Jongno-Gu 
Seoul 110-793 
Phone: +82 2 3674 6150 
Fax: 
+82 2 3674 6996 
Email: khbarng@momaf.go.kr 
 
 
 
 
Mr Oh Seung KWON 
Assistant Director 
Ministry of Maritime Affairs and Fisheries 
140-2 Gye-Dong, Jongno-Gu 
Seoul 110-793 
Phone: +82 2 3674 6994 
Fax: 
+82 2 3674 6996 
Email: kos20@momaf.go.kr 
 
 
CCSBT SECRETARIAT 
 
PO Box 37, Deakin West  ACT  2600 
AUSTRALIA 
Phone: +61 2 6282 8396 
Fax: 
+61 2 6282 8407 
 
Mr Brian MACDONALD 
Executive Secretary 
Email: bmacdonald@ccsbt.org 
 
Mr Yukito NARISAWA 
Deputy Executive Secretary 
Email: ynarisawa@ccsbt.org 
 
 
INTERPRETERS 
 
Ms Saemi BABA 
 
 
Commission for the Conservation of 
Southern Bluefin Tuna 
 
Appendix 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the Extended Commission of the 
Twelfth Annual Meeting of the Commission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11-14 October 2005 
Taipei, Taiwan 
 
 
Report of the Extended Commission of the 
Twelfth Annual Meeting of the Commission 
11-14 October 2005 
Taipei, Taiwan 
 
Agenda Item 1. 
Opening of meeting 
1.1 Election of Chair and Vice-Chair for the Extended Commission of the 
Twelfth Meeting of the Commission 
1. 
Mr James Sha was confirmed as Chair of the Extended Commission for CCSBT 
12. 
2. 
The Chair welcomed participants to the fourth meeting of the Extended 
Commission and declared the meeting open. Participants were introduced and the 
list of meeting participants is at Attachment 1. 
 
1.2 Adoption of agenda 
3. 
A revised agenda was adopted and is included at Attachment 2. 
4. 
The list of documents submitted to the meeting is at Attachment 3. 
 
1.3 Opening Statements 
1.3.1 Members 
5. 
Opening statements by Members of the Extended Commission are at 
Attachment 4. 
 
1.3.2 Cooperating Non-Members 
6. 
The opening statement of the Philippines is at Attachment 5. 
 
1.3.3 Other States and entities 
7. 
Indonesia presented an opening statement, which is at Attachment 6. 
 
Agenda Item 2. 
Report from the Secretariat 
8. 
Members noted the report from the Secretariat (CCSBT-EC/0510/04) and in 
particular, the addendum to that report concerning an alleged breach of the 
privileges made available to the Commission Secretariat in Australia under the 
Headquarters Agreement.  The Extended Commission noted the Executive 
Secretary’s intention to write to the Australian Government expressing his 
concern at this alleged breach of privilege. 
 
9. 
Taiwan noted that workloads were becoming an issue for the Secretariat and that 
the Extended Commission will have to address this matter.  Taiwan also noted 
that the Secretariat needed to become involved in international fisheries forums 
and supported, in particular, attendance at the Review Conference of the UN Fish 
Stocks Agreement in 2006. 
10. Members were pleased to note that the USA was cooperating with the operation 
of the CCSBT Statistical Document Program.   
11. In response to a question from New Zealand as to whether any TIS documents 
relating to non-members catch since the start of the IUU Resolution (1 July 2005) 
had been received, the Executive Secretary advised that it would not expect such 
documents, if any, to be received until December 2005. 
 
Agenda Item 3. 
Report from the Finance and Administration Committee 
12. The Executive Secretary briefly introduced papers CCSBT-EC/05010/05 (2005 
revised budget) and CCSBT-EC/05010/06 (2006 draft budget).  Detailed 
consideration of these papers was referred to the Finance and Administrative 
Committee (FAC). 
13. In response to a question from Australia, the Executive Secretary advised that the 
interest being earned by the Secretariat on its fixed term deposit and cash 
management accounts was about 5.45% and 4.75% respectively. 
14. The FAC was convened to consider the revised budget for 2005 and the proposed 
budget for 2006.  New Zealand was nominated to chair the FAC and Australia 
acted as rapporteur.   
15. The FAC noted that the figures for the revised budget for 2005 were near final 
and there was confidence that the surplus of $112,500 identified for that year was 
available for carry forward to the 2006 budget.  The Extended Commission 
accepted the revised budget for 2005 as shown in Attachment 7. 
16. The FAC considered the general budget proposed for 2006 and noted that: 
• The budget assumes no additional roles or major tasks for the Secretariat; 
• There have been major changes in specific budget outlays between 2005 and 
2006; 
• Estimated expenditure has declined but cash reserves have not been applied to 
the budget; 
• Some decisions of the Extended Commission resulted in increased costs which 
were incorporated in a revised budget; 
• Further decisions of the Extended Commission at this meeting that result in 
increased costs will require revision of the 2006 budget proposed or funding of 
additional activities from reserves held by the Secretariat; 
• The general budget as proposed will result in a 5.8% increase in Member 
contributions; 
• The increase in contributions is within the Commission agreed guidelines of 
10%; and 
 
• The business of the Secretariat is considerably eased by early payment of 
Member contributions. 
17. The Extended Commission accepted the general budget as proposed (noting that 
this will result in a 5.8% increase in Member contributions).  The Extended 
Commission noted the FAC also recommended that contributions to the 2006 
budget by Members are made as early as possible and encouraged Members to do 
so. 
18. The FAC considered the special budget proposed for 2006 (CCSBT SRP tagging 
program) and noted that: 
• There were both increases in anticipated expenditure (5.6%) and reductions in 
alternative funding sources to offset this expenditure; 
• An increase in Member contributions of 21% is required in the proposed draft 
budget to meet the 2006 program commitments; 
• Options to reduce the scale of tagging to reduce costs were not supported; 
• Cash surplus of $70,000 is held by the Secretariat (note not cash reserves); 
• Australia agreed that revenue from tagging ($3,661) be used to offset costs 
19. The Extended Commission agreed to a transfer of $70,000 from the general 
budget to the special budget.  This will reduce the requirement to increase 
Member contributions to 6.3% (shown in Attachment 7).  The Extended 
Commission accepted the 2006 special budget as revised. 
 
Agenda Item 4. 
Relationship with Non-members 
20. The Executive Secretary introduced paper CCSBT-EC/0510/07, which outlined 
contact with non-members since CCSBT11.  The countries involved included 
Indonesia, South Africa, China, Spain, Fiji and USA. 
21. The Extended Commission was particularly concerned with the advice that Spain 
had reported catch of SBT and that this was from cruises exploring new fishing 
grounds not previously fished by Spanish fleets. Members also noted that China 
was not responding to correspondence from the Extended Commission. 
22. It was agreed that the Executive Secretary would: 
• Write to Spain and the European Commission concerning their catch of SBT 
and seek advice on their intentions for developing new fisheries. The 
correspondence should seek information on log data or lab reports from the 
exploration cruises that caught the SBT. The letter would also request advice 
on Spanish swordfish fishing activity in the eastern Indian Ocean  and between 
Australia and New Zealand in waters where SBT are present. 
• Write to China again seeking advice on their intentions in relation to SBT and 
catch information for any product caught and consumed domestically. 
• Ask Fiji for advice on fishing activity operating out of Fiji, which might 
involve fishing in areas where SBT were present. 
23. The Executive Secretary outlined the current situation on Indonesia explaining 
the reasons offered for why Indonesia had decided not to apply for cooperating 
non-membership. Members were particularly concerned over this situation in the 
 
light of the increasing catch of SBT by Indonesia in 2005 and the effect this 
would have on the spawning stock. 
24.  Indonesia advised the Extended Commission that it was the intention of 
Indonesia to fully cooperate with the CCSBT as reflected by data provision 
improvement in response to the CCSBT catch monitoring system and 
cooperation in fisheries statistical data collection with the Indian Ocean Tuna 
Commission (IOTC), the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organisation (CSIRO) and the Overseas Fishery Cooperation Foundation 
(OFCF). Further, the Indonesian delegate informed the Extended Commission 
that Indonesia has strengthened fisheries management through the 
implementation of the VMS for those vessels permitted to fish in the Indonesian 
EEZ and to become a full member of the IOTC in the very near future. It was 
explained that the delay in applying for cooperating non-membership was the 
outcome of internal government process connected to policies for Indonesia 
involvement in international organizations. The Indonesian delegate recognized 
that the portfolio with the responsibility for international fisheries management 
would continue to urge the case for cooperating non-membership and was 
hopeful that it would have a positive impact. Members discussed using 
diplomatic means to support the fisheries management portfolio in this regard. 
25. Indonesia was asked for information on the activities of its registered vessels 
fishing south of Java where the sudden increase in catch has occurred. Indonesia 
responded by indicating they had some doubts over the accuracy of the estimates 
provided by the IOTC and would report back to the Extended Commission. 
Indonesia also advised that they were not certain which vessels were fishing 
south of Java as their VMS system still did not have comprehensive coverage and 
was concentrated on the Arafura Sea. 
26. Concern was expressed by some Members that much of the Indonesian fishing 
activity was by ex-Taiwanese fishing vessels, which retained Taiwanese 
ownership and fishing principals. New Zealand recalled that Article 15.2 of the 
Convention, which requires Members to take action to prevent these activities, 
was designed to prevent this situation and expressed its view that fishing on the 
spawning ground seriously undermines the objectives of the Convention. Taiwan 
stated that any solution on this issue required cooperation from Indonesia.  The 
Chair encouraged Taiwan to contact Indonesia to find a solution. 
 
Agenda Item 5. 
Review of SBT Fisheries 
27. Reports on the SBT fisheries of Members of the Extended Commission and 
Cooperating Non-Members are included at Attachment 8. 
28. Under Extended Commission rules for this item it is assumed Members will have 
read the Members’ reports and discussion is to be confined to questions on report 
contents. In this context: 
• Korea asked Australia for advice on the reported discard rate (61%) in the east 
coast longline fishery and considered it appropriate for the fishery to be closed.  
Korea was advised by Australia that this is a very small proportion of the 
Australian fishery.  However small, Australia has taken this issue seriously 
and it has been resolved by introducing higher mandatory quota holdings 
 
within an exclusion zone, a rule of nil discards and requiring 100% observer 
coverage for longline vessels within an exclusion zone.  These measures have 
resulted in a nil discarding rate by east coast longline vessels in 2005.  
• Australia asked Taiwan and Japan about the impediments to achieving the 
observer coverage targets set by the Extended Commission. Each responded 
by indicating that they were aiming to achieve the 10% target but were finding 
it difficult because of the expense, nature of far seas fishing, deployment 
logistics and recruitment/training difficulties.  Japan pointed out that 
performance of observers should be fully taken into account as well as 
observer coverage. 
• Australia asked Taiwan how it manages catch of SBT when a vessel has no 
quota or its quota is exhausted. Taiwan advised that when quota is exhausted 
the vessel must leave the fishery and there are penalties imposed on vessels 
that land SBT without quota. 
• Australia asked Japan for an explanation for the carry forward of a catch of 69 
tonnes into 2004. Japan advised that in 2002 it had over-caught its quota and 
intended to recover this in 2003. However this was not possible so a further 
adjustment was made in 2004. 
29. Australia pointed out that a number of Members have failed to meet scientific 
observer coverage rates specified in the CCSBT standards and this is 
compromising SRP outcomes. 
 
Agenda Item 6. 
Report from the Extended Scientific Committee 
30. The Chair of the Scientific Committee (SC), Mr Penney reported on the stock 
status and management advice arising from the Sixth Meeting of the Stock 
Assessment Group and the Tenth Meeting of the Scientific Committee.  The 
presentation is provided in CCSBT-EC/0510/27.  The report of the Tenth 
meeting of the Scientific Committee and its Extended Scientific Committee 
(SC10) is included at Attachment 9.   
31. The SC chair made the following key points: 
• Indicators reviewed by the SAG confirmed at least two years of low 
recruitment (2000 and 2001) and there are indications that 1999 may also have 
been low. Recruitment in 2004 may have slightly improved but there will need 
to be more time before this can be confirmed. 
• The SC and independent panel recommended that the risk of further reduction 
in the spawning stock below its current level should be minimised. 
• That if there are no reductions in catch and the Management Procedure (MP) 
is not implemented then model runs show a rapid and continuing decline in 
spawning stock biomass because of low recruitment. Continued annual catches 
at current levels (assumed as 14,930t) will result in a 50% probability that the 
spawning stock will decline to 0t by 2030 and only a 20% chance that the 
spawning stock will be at or above its current level by 2030. 
• If a MP is implemented but there is no reduction in catch in 2006 or 2007, 
then model runs show that while the decline will not be as rapid, there will be 
a 50% chance that the stock will decline by 25% before it will be able to 
 
rebuild and the median biomass will be below the current historically lowest 
level for six consecutive years. There would also be a 10% chance that the 
stock would fall to half its current level. Further, if poor recruitment continues 
the MP will not be able to rebuild the stock. 
• if the recommended MP at the recommended tuning level is implemented 
together with the proposed 5,000 tonne catch reduction in 2006 there is a 50% 
chance of avoiding further decline and a high probability of rebuilding 
biomass under the MP in the longer term. 
32. The SC Chair provided the following answers to questions by the Commission. 
33. Australia: Regarding the reasons for the SC’s recommendation that any further 
decline in spawner biomass should be avoided: 
• The main concern is the possibility of further years of poor recruitment.  A 
further period of 2 or more years of low recruitment would be expected to 
contribute to rapid stock declines below current low levels.  Although the 
reasons for low recruitment in 2000 and 2001 are not known, the concern is 
that further declines in spawner biomass might result in low future recruitment 
as well.  The Advisory Panel and SC therefore recommended that this risk be 
reduced by implementing measures that have a high probability of preventing 
further declines in spawner biomass. 
34. Australia: Regarding the SC’s level of confidence in the projections by the 
operating model and the probability ranges around the results of various 
management actions: 
• It was emphasized that the current OM has been specifically designed to 
incorporate wide ranges of variability in many factors (such as stock 
reproductivity (stock-recruit steepness), natural mortality, the relationship 
between CPUE and abundance, autocorrelation in recruitment and 
catchability), over which there has been past scientific disagreement.  As a 
result, there are wide ranges of probabilities around the model fits and 
projections produced by the OM, to account for these sources of variability.  
The OM represented the best estimate by the SC. 
• The SC is confident that the OM model under the reference set is the best 
available model description of the SBT stock, and that the results of 
management actions will lie within these predicted probability ranges.  As a 
consequence of the high variability incorporated, these ranges are wide (e.g. 
the envelope of probability of future biomass under status quo management 
ranges from zero to over double current stock size). 
• While the SC is confident of the indicated proportional probabilities of the 
future resource being in a particular state at a particular time, it must be 
remembered that this remains dependent on what actually happens with factors 
such as future recruitment, and the “truth” lies within the predicted range.  The 
CCSBT needs to decide what level of risk to accept.   
35. Australia: Regarding which data are most important in convincing the SC that 
recruitments in 1999, 2000 and 2001 had been poor: 
• The reduction in catches of small fish (< 4 yrs old) in the LL fisheries had 
been the first data indicating poor recruitment, and are the data specifically 
used by the OM to track / estimate recruitment levels.  However, it was not 
 
just the LL catch of small fish which was used to determine the likelihood of 
poor recent recruitment.  Agreement on this had resulted from growing 
agreement over the past three years between information on LL small fish 
catch, results of the acoustic recruitment surveys, results of the aerial line-
transect and commercial spotting surveys and estimates of surface fishery 
exploitation rates from tagging data.  These all now indicate at least 2 years of 
poor recruitment. 
• Past doubts related to validity of the aerial survey indices had been addressed 
through review of the design of the transect surveys and re-analysis of the data. 
36. Australia: Regarding why the initial imposition of a global TAC of 11,750t in the 
late 1980s had not resulted in rebuilding of the stock: 
• The SC cannot conclude why re-building did not occur, other than to accept 
the OM assessments that stock productivity was lower than had been 
estimated or hoped in 1989.  The low recruitments from 1999 - 2001 certainly 
indicate that the stock is susceptible to periods of low productivity. 
• However, it is difficult to dis-entangle this from any possible effects of un-
reported catch, as the OM is conditioned upon the catch data provided.  No 
agreement has yet been reached at the SC on any alternate catch series to use 
to evaluate possible effects of unreported catch. 
37. Australia: Regarding the feasibility of using the current OM to conduct 
retrospective analyses of predicted stock projections from various years in the 
past (such as 1989):  
• This had not been done yet by the SAG/SC, but could certainly be done, to see 
what the OM would predict following the initial TAC implementation.  
However, it must be remembered that the OM would not have had any basis in 
1989 from which to predict poor recruitments, and would be expected to give 
more optimistic projection than those seen at this meeting.  However, the 
Advisory Panel could conduct such retrospective evaluations. 
38. Australia requested that such evaluations be conducted, and offered to cover 
associated costs of these analyses.   
39. Australia: Regarding what percentage of unreported catch could be tolerated 
before this would jeopardise recovery along the trajectories projected by the OM: 
• While there has been past recognition at SAG/SC meetings of the need to 
conduct specific analyses to evaluate the effect of various levels of unreported 
catch, no agreement was reached on what levels to use, and so such analyses 
had not yet been conducted. 
• Some robustness testing had been conducted assuming low levels of 
unreported catch (5% for 1969 - 1990 and 15% from 1991 onward), which 
suggested that the effect of such levels of unreported catch was less than the 
other sources of variability incorporated in the OM. 
• However, analyses reviewed at the SC10 meeting indicated that higher levels 
of unreported catch (~30%) resulted in more pessimistic assessments of stock 
status and recruitment.  So, while low levels (5%) of unreported catch might 
not jeopardise recovery, higher levels such as 30% would be of concern for the 
stock status. 
 
• The SC had repeated its request that the Commission ensure the collection and 
reporting of complete and accurate global SBT catch to the SAG/SC. 
40. Taiwan: Regarding the SC’s reasons for recommending CMP_2, which appeared 
to provide lower long-term average TACs than CMP_1, the reasons for 
recommending such a large initial cut and why a 90% probability of preventing 
spawning biomass from dropping below current levels had been recommended as 
a tuning level (rather than the original 1.1 or 1.3 median biomass tuning levels): 
• The SC had evaluated the predicted effect of initial catch reductions of 0t, 
2500t and 5000t (these being the maximum cut allowed under current TAC 
change constraints, half of that and no cut).  While a 2500t reduction had a 
50% probability of stabilising the stock at current levels in the long term, there 
was still a 70% chance of the stock declining to lower levels in 2014.  The 
concern that this might result in future low recruitment had prompted the SC 
to recommend that future decline in spawner biomass below current levels be 
prevented, at least with a 50% probability.  This could only be achieved with a 
catch reduction of ~5000t.  However, it must be noted that even with a 5000t 
catch reduction, coupled with subsequent MP implementation, median 
biomass recovery levels by 2022 would still be less than half of the 1980 
levels. 
• It must be remembered that future TACs under any MP could lie anywhere 
within the ranges of probability shown, depending on future stock productivity, 
and would not be expected to lie on the indicated medians.  The key trade-off 
that was considered in recommending CMP_2 over CMP_1 relates to the 
“early pain” vs “late pain” trade-off.  While CMP_1 would be expected to 
increase catches more rapidly under stock recovery, and so result in larger 
average long-term catches, it does so by implementing large TAC cuts in early 
years, to promote rebuilding.  In contrast, CMP_2 has lower levels of TAC 
cuts in early years, as well as lower increases under stock recovery.  CMP_2 
was recommended as a result of this lower variability in TAC changes. 
• The SC had moved away from the initial long-term recovery tuning levels (1.1 
or 1.3 SB by 2022) in order to address what is perceived to be a shorter-term 
risk of further declines up to 2014.  As a result, the recommended tuning level 
now equates to a medium-term objective of having a 90% probability of 
preventing any further declines in spawner biomass below current levels.  This, 
coincidentally, results in 1.9 recovery in biomass by 2022, but this was not set 
as an objective.  An alternative tuning level of 80% probability of preventing 
further decline in spawner biomass was also investigated, which results in 
about a 1.5 recovery by 2022.  The Commission might want to consider such 
alternative tuning levels, depending upon what medium-term risk of further 
spawner biomass declines is considered acceptable. 
• Alternately, the Commission could have separate short- and long-term 
objectives, adopting a MP tuning level to prevent further stock declines up to 
2014, and then re-tuning the MP to attain e.g. a 1.3 SB recovery by 2022.  It is 
certainly expected that the MP would be reviewed, and probably revised, after 
6 years or so.  However, it must be remembered that the implicit 1.9 recovery 
in the recommended tuning would result in a doubling of median biomass 
from very low levels, and would still only be expected (with 50% probability) 
to recover the stock to less than half the 1980 level. 
 
41. Taiwan: Regarding whether incorporation of recent catches less than the 14,930t 
used by the OM would result in a more optimistic assessment: 
• Recent catches have only been some 1,400t lower than the 14,930t.  Current 
projections indicate that a substantial catch reduction (~5000t) would be 
required to prevent further stock declines, and so the 1,400t  decline in 2004 
catches would only be expected to have a slightly positive effect on OM 
assessments.  However, this is not the only new information that we have.  
The OM currently estimates that the 1999 recruitment level was average, 
whereas recent indices suggest that 1999 was also below the average 
recruitment in the early 1990s.  Incorporation of this new information would 
be expected to make OM assessments more pessimistic. 
42. Japan: Regarding the feasibility and possible benefits of expressing management 
recommendations (TAC changes) in numbers of fish, rather than weight: 
• The current assumption made by the OM (as stipulated by the Commission) is 
that proportional allocations betweens fisheries, and selectivity by those 
fisheries, will remain as they currently are.  Under this assumption, there 
would be no expected difference in conducting assessment and management 
projections in terms of fish numbers, rather than weight.  At present, numbers 
of fish caught are determined from reported catch weights, raised using length-
frequency distributions and cohort slicing, which is also not particularly 
accurate. 
• While it is quite possible to conduct assessments in terms of numbers, the 
implications of increased or reduced fishing mortality on particularly age 
classes could only be done in response to a specific Commission request to 
evaluate alternative allocations between fisheries, or to evaluate changes in 
selectivities of these fisheries.  Both such changes would require some re-
specification of the OM. 
43. Japan: Regarding the recruitment levels which could be expected from various 
levels of spawner biomass, and the benefits of reducing fishing mortality on 
small fish to allow them to recruit into the spawning stock: 
• The question of steepness in the stock-recruit relationship remains the main 
source of variability in OM assessments of stock productivity, and the OM 
explores a wide range of options in the stock-recruit relationship.  The SC 
does not hold the view that recruiting cohort strengths are stable between years, 
and does not assume that the SBT stock is capable of producing high 
recruitments at low spawner biomass.  It seems clear that, in the past 10-15 
years, we have seen periods of strong recruitment (1990-95) with rebuilding, 
and a period of 2-3 poor year classes (1999-2001).  The SC is concerned that 
recent low recruitments may be related to the current low spawner biomass 
levels. 
• The SAG/SC has not explored the implications of alternative fishing 
mortalities on different age-classes, and the OM assumes that allocations 
between fisheries remain in the current proportions.  The SAG/SC has 
therefore not specifically evaluated the implications of reducing F on young or 
older fish.  However, the SC recognises that there is high fishing mortality on 
all SBT age classes, and that both the surface and longline fisheries (other than 
the fisheries on the spawning ground) primarily exploit pre-spawning fish.  
 
There is also fairly high uncertainty in estimates of natural mortality for young 
SBT. 
44. Australia responded that in relation to the small fish issue, that it had a right to 
target fish in the surface fishery, and emphasized that this fishery would continue. 
45. New Zealand: Regarding where the management measures recommended by the 
SC would be expected to rebuild the stock to, in comparison with 1980 or 1989 
levels, and the risk of current low spawner biomass levels: 
• The OM assesses median spawner biomass to currently be at its lowest level 
of 51,139t, in comparison with 257,902 t in 1980 and 128,652t in 1989.  The 
effective 1.91 recovery by 2022 under the recommended MP would be 
expected to produce a median spawner biomass of 105,770t by 2022 and 
143,450t by 2030.  Median long-term recovery would still only be 55% of the 
1980 level. 
• SBT spawner biomass is currently considered to be at 10%-30% of the 1980 
levels, and some 5-12% of unexploited levels.  These levels are well below 
what would normally be considered as safe fisheries reference points.  This is 
why the Advisory Panel, SAG & SC have recommended that spawner biomass 
should be prevented from declining any further. 
• New Zealand noted the SC Chair’s observation that the recommendation of 
the SC that an MP be implemented with a proposed catch reduction in 2006 of 
5000t is not based on a precautionary approach as a precautionary approach 
would dictate a greater than 50/50 chance spawner biomass levels will not go 
below current levels in future. 
46. Korea noted that a CPUE level of 3.0 fish/1,000 hooks was considered to be the 
minimum economic CPUE level for their fleet, and that CPUE had declined as 
low as 1.0 fish/1,000 hooks in some Indian Ocean fishing areas.  Similar CPUE 
declines had been experienced in the Pacific Ocean.  Korea therefore concurred 
with the SAG/SC assessment of the state of the stock, and supported the 
recommended management recommendations in order to improve CPUE.  Korea 
also expressed concern at indications of under-reported catch in market data, and 
noted that this would need to be addressed to facilitate recovery. 
 
Agenda Item 7. 
Total Allowable Catch and its Allocation 
47. All Members noted with concern  the advice of the SC on stock status and 
management recommendations (paragraphs 65 and 68 of the SC10 Report), in 
particular:  
• Given all the evidence, it seems highly likely that current levels of catch will 
result in further declines in spawning stock and exploitable biomass, 
particularly because of recent low recruitments; 
• That the Commission accepts CMP_2 as its procedure, combined with a 
corresponding reduction in the annual assumed global catch (14,930t) 
specified for 2006 (by 5,000t) or 2007 (by 7,160t); and 
• That CMP_2 be tuned so that there is an estimated 90% probability that the 
2022 biomass will be at or above the 2004 biomass. This means, in effect, that 
there is an estimated 10% chance that the stock will be below the 2004 level in 
 
2022. This would lead to a higher estimated median biomass in 2022 than that 
examined at MPWS4 but lower than either the 1980 or 1989 stock levels. 
48. The poor status of the stock was acknowledged and Members recognised the 
need for a reduction in global catch in either 2006 or 2007. 
49. Members considered the reductions in catch recommended by the Extended 
Scientific Committee. The reductions were a cut of 5,000 tonnes in the annual 
assumed global catch of 14,930 tonnes if implemented in 2006 or a reduction of 
7,160 tonnes if implemented in 2007. 
50. The Extended Commission noted the observations and recommendations that 
were endorsed by the Scientific Committee that “in the event that it is determined 
that the global catches are higher, or the characteristics of the catch (e.g. the age, 
and size composition, distribution among sectors) are substantially different from 
those assumed in the operating model, then the total catch reduction required to 
achieve the same stock stabilization would need to be recalculated.  It is expected 
that the catch reduction required would be approximately an equivalent 
percentage of total removals under most circumstances.  Therefore, in the 
absence of a calculation, the SAG recommended a catch reduction equivalent in 
percentage of total removals”. 
51. The Extended Commission also noted the advice of the Chair of the Scientific 
Committee that if unreported catches were 15% higher than current reported 
global catch then these would be considered substantially different and would 
trigger a recalculation. 
52. Australia accepted the recommendations of the SC noted in paragraph  47 on the 
MP tuning level and a reduction of catch in 2007 and strongly urged other 
Members to do the same. 
53. Australia is committed to investigating any unreported catch of SBT. The 
outcomes of the investigation need to be available by June 2006 so that the 
findings can be taken into account in determining the catch reductions required 
for 2007. 
54. Australia expressed its strong disappointment that the Members could not reach a 
consensus on the 2006 TAC at this meeting. 
55. New Zealand considered that the advice from the SC obliged the Extended 
Commission to respond as quickly as possible and to adopt the 5,000 tonne 
reduction (in the assumed global catch of 14,930 tonnes) recommended for 2006 
in conjunction with the recommended MP and tuning level.  Both elements are 
necessary to arrest stock decline and to begin rebuilding the stock. To avoid 
taking a decision on the level and timing of a TAC reduction in accordance with 
the SC advice at this meeting would compromise the integrity of, and reflect 
badly on, the Extended Commission. However, New Zealand agreed to accept a 
reduction in 2007 of 7,160 tonnes from the global assumed catch if all Members 
do so at this meeting. 
56. New Zealand recalled the Extended Commission’s decisions as reported in 
paragraphs 42-46 of the CCSBT 11 Meeting Report and paragraphs 52-54 of the 
CCSBT 10 Meeting Report and confirmed its understanding that the Extended 
Commission will resolve the issue with respect to adjustment of national 
allocations in accordance with these decisions at CCSBT 13. 
 
57. Taiwan agreed with Australia that the initial reduction in the catch should occur 
in 2007 and concurred that the outcomes of the investigation of any unreported 
catch of SBT need to be available by June 2006 so that the findings can be taken 
into account in determining the catch reductions required for 2007. 
58. Korea indicated that its preferred position was for the catch reduction to take 
effect in 2006 and that even in 2007, the size of the reduction should be the 5,000 
tonnes proposed for 2006. However, Korea was flexible and could agree to the 
position of Australia, Taiwan, and New Zealand, i.e., a reduction in 2007 of 
7,160 tonnes from the global assumed catch, if that was the general view of the 
Extended Commission. 
59. Japan seriously took note of each Member’s commitment regarding the reduction 
of TAC in 2007.  Japan expressed its view that it will work to put in place 
domestic procedures to seriously consider substantial TAC reduction in 2007. 
60. New Zealand reiterated its position that it supported the advice of the Scientific 
Committee that a TAC reduction of 5,000 tonnes is required in 2006 but that it 
was prepared to agree to a specific reduction in the TAC in 2007 of 7,160 tonnes 
consistent with advice of the SC.  New Zealand stated that it could not agree to 
simply roll over the 2005 TAC to 2006 without a clear decision on a specific 
reduction in 2007.  
61. New Zealand requested that a Special Meeting of the Extended Commission be 
held early next year to resolve the issue, as waiting until CCSBT13 to address 
this issue could mean that the Commission finds itself at CCSBT13 in the same 
position as today, which would not be acceptable to New Zealand. In making this 
proposal, New Zealand noted that the lack of consensus at this meeting on a TAC 
reduction in 2006 or 2007 consistent with the advice of the SC was due to the 
inability of one Member to commit to a specific TAC reduction in 2007 as it 
needed to complete its domestic consultation process. New Zealand suggested 
that a Special Meeting early next year would allow time to complete this process, 
which would hopefully facilitate agreement on a specific TAC reduction for 2007 
at CCSBT13. 
62. New Zealand deeply regretted that consensus had not been reached on a TAC 
reduction for 2006 or 2007, which took into account the advice of the SC and that 
the lack of consensus on a reduced TAC as recommended by the Scientific 
Committee would not reflect well on the Extended Commission. It urged 
Members to ensure that at CCSBT13 the EC is able to demonstrate its ability to 
comprehensively address the very poor state of the stock, which currently 
threatens both the biological and economic viability of the fishery.    
63. New Zealand stated that the Extended Commission could not walk away from a 
decision on the TAC, which took into account the advice of the SC and suggested 
that if the Extended Commission could work through this issue at an 
intersessional meeting this would send a positive message to the international 
community. New Zealand added that the EC had still to consider many issues 
associated with the TAC, which could be considered at the Special Meeting, 
particularly the implementation of earlier decisions of the Extended Commission 
on national allocations, as reflected in the CCSBT1 Mutual Understanding, the 
implementation of the Management Procedure, the catch monitoring and 
reporting and the Compliance Committee. 
 
64. New Zealand noted that the report of this meeting does not link the independent 
review, referred to in paragraphs  129 to  133 of this report, to the need for a 
reduction in the TAC. It expressed its opinion that the review may inform the 
TAC decision but the key purpose of the Special Meeting would be to facilitate 
consensus on a TAC decision at CCSBT 13. New Zealand further noted the 
advice of the Chair of the Scientific Committee that if the independent review did 
not result in significant revisions to the information then the SC would not 
change its management advice, however, if the independent review did provide 
significant revisions or resulted in a request to evaluate alternative catch 
scenarios then the full SAG would be required to do the work and would be able 
to provide results in time for CCSBT 13 (October 2006). 
65. New Zealand noted that because the Extended Commission had not been able to 
reach consensus on a TAC consistent with the advice of the SC, that New 
Zealand could not accept a simple rollover of the 2005 TAC in 2006 as such a 
decision, without a commitment to a specific reduction in the TAC in 2007, was 
totally inconsistent with the advice of the SC. 
66. In the absence of agreement on a specific TAC reduction for 2006 or 2007 
consistent with the SC’s advice, pursuant to Article 8(3)(b) the Extended 
Commission agreed that Members’ and Cooperating Non-Members’ catch limits 
for 2006 would not exceed the levels agreed for 2005, as set out in paragraph  36 
of CCSBT11 Meeting Report.  Members reinforced their strong commitment to a 
reduction of SBT catch in 2007. The Extended Commission agreed that this 
decision constituted the 12-months lead time required for the implementation of 
TAC changes.  These issues will be further pursued at a Special Meeting of the 
Extended Commission in July 2006. 
67. The Extended Commission emphasised that the rebuilding of the SBT spawning 
stock and reducing the risk of further decline of the spawning stock is critical for 
the Commission.  In this context and in adopting the recommendations of the 
Scientific Committee the Members agreed in relation to total allowable catch and 
its allocation to take the following actions: 
• Implementation of a management procedure including adoption of CMP_2; 
• Commitment to the timely provision of accurate data to ensure effective 
operation of the MP; 
• Agreement to a Special Meeting of the Extended Commission in July 2006 to 
work towards a consensus on reduction of SBT catch for 2007; 
• Continuation of the 50 tonne catch limit for the Philippines for 2006; 
• Offering a 45 tonne catch limit to South Africa; and 
• Setting aside an 800 tonne catch limit for Indonesia should it decide to reverse 
its position and apply to become a Cooperating Non-Member. 
68. The SC report linked the recommended catch reductions to the implementation of 
a management procedure. Subsequent adjustments to catch levels being 
determined by a management procedure were discussed under item 8. 
 
 
Agenda Item 8. 
Management Procedure 
69. Members agreed to the Management Procedure recommended by the SC 
(referenced in the SC10 Report as CMP_2). The draft specification of this 
Management Procedure is at Attachment 6 of the Report of the Tenth Meeting of 
the Scientific Committee. The Extended Commission agreed that resolution of 
the matters identified in the shaded areas of the text of the draft specification 
must be resolved by the Extended Scientific Committee at its next meeting. 
70.  The Extended Commission noted the advice of the Scientific Committee that 
performance of the Management Procedure was dependent on the quality of input 
data and their request that appropriate mechanisms be put in place to collect and 
validate the required data. The Commission recognised the need for a 
commitment by all Members to the timely provision of accurate validated data to 
ensure the MP performed as expected. 
71. It was recognised that implementation of the selected management procedure was 
linked to the decision on the initial catch reduction recommended by the SC. In 
this context it was agreed that if an initial catch reduction was adopted for 
implementation in 2007, the first catch reduction required by the Management 
Procedure would occur in 2009, as envisaged under implementation Schedule E 
described in the SAG 6 report.   
 
Agenda Item 9. 
Cooperating Non-Members 
72. The Executive Secretary presented paper CCSBT-EC/0510/12 regarding 
Cooperating Non-Members and also advised the Extended Commission of a 
letter received from South Africa on 8 October 2005 requesting a catch allocation 
totalling 60t from the CCSBT and providing catch information for 2004.   
73. The Extended Commission noted that the Philippines was complying with its 
obligations as a Cooperating Non-Member and agreed to continue the Philippines 
status as a Cooperating Non-Member.  The Philippines made a commitment to 
continue to refine its reporting on the SBT activities it was undertaking and to 
keep its catch within the limit agreed by the Extended Commission. 
74. Members discussed the allocation requested by South Africa.  The discussion 
included South Africa’s current and past catch levels, its status as a range state 
for SBT, the importance of its participation in the Extended Commission, the 
previous TAC offered to South Africa and the recent poor response from South 
Africa to requests from the Secretariat for catch information.  The current low 
spawning biomass of the SBT stock and the need for catch reductions in the SBT 
fishery were also discussed.  Following the discussion, Members agreed to make 
a final offer of 45 tonne catch limit to South Africa as a condition of it becoming 
a Cooperating Non-Member of the Extended Commission. 
75. Members considered whether there was need for a resolution to extend the status 
of Cooperating Non-Members of the Extended Commissions to become 
Cooperating Non-Members of the Commission.  It was agreed that there was no 
need to have a separate Commission Resolution on Cooperating Non-Member 
status. 
 
 
Agenda Item 10. 
Indonesian Catch Monitoring 
76. The Executive Secretary presented paper CCSBT-EC/0510/13 concerning catch 
monitoring in Indonesia. 
77. Members re-iterated the view stated at CCSBT 11 that it was extremely 
important that the catch monitoring system in Indonesia be continued. 
78. It was noted that the current arrangement of Australia funding monitoring in 
Benoa and Japan funding monitoring in Cilacap and Jakarta would continue till 
March 2007.  A review of these arrangements would be conducted in late 2006. 
79. Indonesia advised that: 
• It was grateful for assistance provided to catch monitoring by CCSBT 
Members; 
• It is serious about its commitment to tuna fisheries and has recently establish a 
Tuna Commission for these fisheries; and 
• There is some uncertainty over the current estimates for the 2005 catch due to 
transhipping of catches and the impact this may have on catch estimates from 
IOTC sampling.  Some further discussion with the IOTC is required before 
finalising these catch estimates. 
 
Agenda Item 11. 
Review of Regional Fisheries Management Bodies 
80. The Executive Secretary presented paper CCSBT-EC/0510/14, which outlined 
the Extended Commission’s consideration a range of options for the CCSBT’s 
involvement in international forums that may review the effectiveness of regional 
fisheries management organisations (RFMO). 
81. Australia apprised the Extended Commission of the background to the proposed 
review of RFMO effectiveness and the discussion at COFI where the process was 
formalised. Australia explained that a High Seas Task Force has a process 
underway to benchmark RFMOs against Article 10 of the UN Fish Stocks 
Agreement. It was emphasised that the process was not a scoring system in 
regard to performance but rather a methodology for encouraging continual 
improvement. The CCSBT should be involved in these activities. 
82. Taiwan noted that the CCSBT rotation policy meant that the CCSBT needs to 
rely on the Secretariat to represent it intersessionally and noted that there would 
be a number of meetings in 2006 where such representation is important. 
83. Japan advised the Extended Commission that it would host a joint meeting of the 
tuna RFMOs in Japan on 22-26 January 2007. A draft agenda will be circulated 
to interested parties in the near future. 
84. New Zealand advised of its continuing support for activities that improved the 
transparency and effectiveness of RFMOs and agreed that the Secretariat needs 
to be involved because it will be able to give an operational perspective to 
deliberations. New Zealand noted that when representing the CCSBT, the 
Secretariat needed to keep Members fully informed of contributions it was giving 
 
in the various review forums as such contributions represented the consolidated 
opinions and experience of Members. 
85. Korea supported a role for the Secretariat, particularly as some of the CCSBT’s 
Asian Members had not yet signed the Fish Stocks Agreement and the proposed 
reviews would be benchmarking against the provisions of that Agreement.   
86. The Extended Commission agreed that The Secretariat should be fully involved 
and represent it in RFMO review activities to be held in 2006 and 2007 and, 
when involved, should keep Members and Cooperating Non-Members fully 
informed. 
 
Agenda Item 12. 
Catch Monitoring System 
12.1 and 12.2 Catch Documentation and Trade Information Schemes 
87. Australia proposed that the Trade Information Scheme (TIS) be replaced by a 
Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS) that would record all catches of SBT 
regardless of whether the SBT were traded.  This would provide transparency 
and give assurance to all Members on the accuracy of catch data. 
88. New Zealand supported the proposal to introduce a comprehensive CDS, in 
addition to strengthening the TIS, to catch trade with non-members, non-exported 
SBT and domestic consumption.  It noted that the adoption of a CDS would give 
comprehensive coverage of catch and trade, which would improve the credibility 
and functionality of the Extended Commission.  New Zealand urged all Members 
to comply with their obligations to provide accurate data to the Extended 
Commission. 
89. The other Members noted the need to strengthen catch monitoring systems, but 
were concerned about the practicality, complexity and costs of such a system.  
They felt there needed to be a demonstrated requirement for a CDS before such a 
system could be implemented. 
90. Members agreed that a technical working group would consider the principles 
that would underlie a CCSBT CDS.  The group reported  that the principles for a 
CCSBT CDS should be: 
• Provides an accurate and timely record of the catch of Member and 
Cooperating Non-Member States consistent with Article 5 of the Convention; 
• Provides for traceability of legitimate product flow to the point of first sale 
(including auction) for domestic markets or, alternatively, for product being 
exported; 
• Provides validation of the catch reporting regime; 
• Provides a means of identifying and quantifying the catches of non-
cooperating states; 
• Provides tools to restrict the trade of non-cooperating non-members; 
• Is compatible with systems in place for other tuna RFMOs and takes into 
account the potential for a global catch monitoring regime; 
• Is cost effective; 
 
• Is tested for practicality with knowledgeable and acceptable industry 
representatives from each sector; 
• Confidentiality of information is ensured; 
• Has a performance measure that the CDS must be capable of accounting for at 
least 95% of all sources of fishing mortality of southern bluefin tuna; 
• Must be a compatible part of monthly catch reporting; 
• Would include port documentation and transfer/transhipping documentation 
capable of trace back to catching vessels; and 
• Must be introduced to all fishery sectors in an equitable manner. 
 
12.3 International Observer Program 
91. Australia proposed that an international observer program (IOP) was required to 
provide transparency and to demonstrate that the data are accurate and a true 
reflection of what is happening in the fishery.  Australia advised that similar 
systems were operated by the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), the South Pacific Commission (SPC), the 
Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) and the IOTC also had an IOP for transhipping 
vessels.  Korea strongly supported the proposal for an IOP to provide greater 
confidence in the data provided by Members. 
92. New Zealand was supportive of an IOP, but felt that scoping work was required 
before deciding on an IOP.  
93. Taiwan noted it was difficult at this stage to have an IOP under the Extended 
Commission, considering the cultural and language barriers that may exist 
between Taiwanese crew and the assigned international observers. 
94. Japan was not convinced on the need for an IOP within CCSBT and there was a 
need to consider cost effectiveness of an IOP and other enforcement measures.  
Japan noted that it was considering an observer program for transhipment vessels. 
95. The Extended Commission agreed that the Secretariat would prepare a discussion 
paper on the issues relevant to the establishment of an IOP for the CCSBT.  This 
document would include: 
• The necessity for an IOP; 
• An analysis of other RFMO IOPs; and 
• The logistics of implementing an IOP in CCSBT. 
 
12.4 Monthly Catch Reporting to the CCSBT 
96. Members agreed to implement monthly catch reporting for SBT.  It was agreed 
that Members would provide catch data to the Secretariat on a monthly basis and 
that this data would be provided no later than one month after the month in which 
fishing occurred. 
97. A technical working group met to agree on the details of the data to be provided 
as part of monthly catch reporting.  The technical group agreed to the following 
recommendations and these were adopted by the Extended Commission: 
 
• That the primary purpose of monthly catch reporting should be to improve the 
management and the compliance regimes for the fishery.  While in the longer 
term there would be some useful scientific data that may be able to be 
provided, at this stage this would not be an objective of the program. 
• As an initial step the monthly catch reporting system should be implemented 
from 1 January 2006. 
• Under the monthly catch reporting system, each month each Member and 
Cooperating Non-Member will provide:  
o total catch for the month; and  
o total cumulative catch for the year to date. 
• Reports are to be made to the Secretariat no later than the last day of the 
following month. 
• Some members of the technical working group sought to have more 
information, or fine scale information provided (eg effort, discards, reporting 
by boat or statistical area), however, the technical working group 
acknowledged that not all Members are in the position to readily collect that 
information and some time is required to evaluate the usefulness of the data 
provided in addressing core objectives.  Hence, the technical working group 
recommended that all aspects of the monthly catch reporting system be 
reviewed by the Commission at CCSBT13.   
 
12.5 Reporting of Fine Scale Shot-by-Shot Data to the CCSBT 
98. Australia proposed that fine scale shot-by-shot data be provided on a confidential 
basis to the Secretariat for the Data Manager to analyse and that these data be 
made available to the independent panel when appropriate.  New Zealand 
supported the proposal for provision of these data and indicated it could provide 
that data under existing systems. 
99. The SC Chair advised that the SC had not been able to resolve two data provision 
issues, these being: (1) Provision of catch information on bycatch species; and (2) 
Provision of data at a 1x1 degree resolution.  The SC had not considered 
provision of fine scale shot-by-shot data for current analyses.  However, data on 
a 1 degree resolution was important for further work to be conducted on 
developing an improved CPUE index for SBT and for one of the CPUE indices 
(ST Windows) required by the Management Procedure. 
100. Japan acknowledged the importance of transparency but that it needed to be 
balanced against the confidentiality of data.  Japan noted that there were a 
number of options for providing access to the necessary 1x1 data.  These 
included someone (e.g. from the Secretariat) conducting the calculations in Japan 
and bringing back the results of the calculations without retaining a copy of the 
data.  Japan stated that such a process would balance transparency and 
confidentiality. 
 
 
Agenda Item 13. 
Compliance Committee 
13.1 Activation of Compliance Committee 
101. The Extended Commission considered the activation of the Compliance 
Committee agreed to at CCSBT4 in 1997. Members noted that the Compliance 
Committee was important in ensuring Members and Cooperating Non-Members 
were in compliance with Extended Commission decisions and to provide 
assurance to all Members, and to review activities on non-members fishing SBT. 
102. The Extended Commission concurred that the existing terms of reference agreed 
at CCSBT 4 by the Commission applies to the Extended Commission under the 
terms of the resolution, which created the Extended Commission. 
103. It was noted, however that because the terms of reference were agreed eight years 
ago and that circumstances have changed, they may require updating. 
104. The appointment of a Chair for the Compliance Committee was discussed. Two 
options were considered – a rotation arrangement where the Vice-Chair of the 
Extended Commission would fill the position of Compliance Committee Chair, 
or an appointment of an individual for a fixed period. 
105. It was agreed: 
• To activate the Compliance Committee with existing terms of reference. 
• The Compliance Committee would meet in association with the annual 
meeting. 
• The rules of procedure would be those for the Extended Commission but that 
the Compliance Committee could choose to adopt its own rules of procedure if 
necessary. 
• The terms of reference would be amended to reflect contemporary 
circumstances and that this would be undertaken intersessionally.  
• A list of work priorities would be developed intersessionally.  These priorities 
will serve as the basis for opening the discussion of the first meeting of the 
Compliance Committee in association with CCSBT 13. 
• The Chair would be appointed for two years with an extension of two years if 
agreed by the Extended Commission. Someone with relevant background 
would be appointed to the position given the special nature of the Compliance 
Committee’s work. The Chair would supervise the intersessional development 
of the terms of reference and work priorities. 
• That a representative from New Zealand would Chair the Compliance 
Committee.  New Zealand would advise the Commission as soon as possible 
as to who the Chair would be.  It noted that the person would be a senior 
official with considerable fisheries management and compliance experience. 
 
Agenda Item 14. 
Quota Trading 
106. Korea, as the Member most interested in quota trading, asked other Members for 
their views on trading of quota. 
 
107. Members other than Korea were not generally disposed towards quota trading in 
the current situation of the SBT stock and where Members were considering a 
reduction in catches. Interest was expressed in developing a set of principles that 
might be applied in the CCSBT, which would cover all forms of fishing quota 
such as joint ventures, quota leasing, quota trading and chartering. However, this 
was not seen as a priority at this time. 
108. Quota trading/chartering/joint venture arrangements, including the situation in 
the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT), 
were also discussed as a guide for the development of a CCSBT policy if this 
course was eventually adopted by the Extended Commission. 
109. The Executive Secretary advised the Extended Commission that in his opinion 
the independent legal advice obtained by the Extended Commission for CCSBT 
11 and the terms of the Convention allowed the interpretation that: 
• any quota trading or quota leasing arrangements either with Members or non-
members would require a decision of the Extended Commission and a 
framework agreed by the Extended Commission;  
• it was possible for a Member to enter into charter arrangements or joint 
venture arrangements but any quota used for this purpose would have to be 
counted against  the Member and that Member would be responsible for full 
compliance with the reporting, vessel register, conservation and management 
requirements of the Extended Commission; and 
• Members could enter into bilateral access arrangements into a Member’s EEZ 
without requiring the approval of the Extended Commission, but these should 
be advised to the Extended Commission. 
110. By way of example, the Executive Secretary advised that it would be possible for 
Korea to enter into an arrangement with Australia to fish its quota in Australia’s 
EEZ under a chartering agreement but Korea would be fully responsible for the 
catch. 
111. The Extended Commission decided not to respond to Korea’s request by 
agreeing to general rules for quota trading. However, it was noted that Korea 
would develop a set of principles and guidelines for consideration at CCSBT 13. 
 
Agenda Item 15. 
Intersessional Decisions 
112. The Extended Commission considered an amendment to Rule 5 of the Rules of 
Procedure to provide for the use of modern communication systems for 
intersessional decision making as set out in CCSBT-EC/0510/18. 
113. It was agreed to amend the Rules of Procedure as follows recalling the criteria 
listed in paragraph 76 of the report of CCSBT 11, in particular, noting that 
intersessional decision making is intended only for exceptional circumstances: 
 “5. Where necessary when the Commission is not in session, decisions 
of the Commission shall be taken by a unanimous vote of the Members. 
The vote will be organised by the Executive Secretary in consultation with 
the Chair using the post, facsimile or e-mail. The decision will be formally 
recorded by the Executive Secretary in a format agreed by the Commission 
 
and circulated to Members.  In circumstances where the Chair is satisfied 
that a Member has received a proposal, and that Member has not 
responded within 21 days to the proposal, the Member shall be taken to 
have responded to that proposal in the affirmative.” 
 
Agenda Item 16. 
Executive Secretary 
114. The Executive Secretary and the Deputy Executive Secretary contracts expire in 
February and May 2006. 
115. It was agreed to extend the term of the Executive Secretary for one year (to 
October 2006) to allow time for recruitment of a new Executive Secretary.  The 
process to appoint a new Executive Secretary should include advertising in the 
international press and a transparent selection process against agreed criteria. 
116. It was further agreed that the recruitment process for the new Executive Secretary 
would commence immediately.  In particular that the current Executive Secretary 
would circulate the proposed process, including a job specification as soon as 
possible. 
 
Agenda Item 17. 
Action Plan 
117. The Executive Secretary presented paper CCSBT-EC/0510/20 concerning the 
Action Plan. 
118. With respect to Indonesia, the Extended Commission noted that the CCSBT 
resolution on IUU fishing and establishment of a CCSBT record of vessels has 
effectively imposed trade restriction measures on Indonesia, which is equivalent 
to that in Paragraph 6 of the Action Plan.  It was agreed that the Executive 
Secretary would write to Indonesia explaining that Indonesia will continue to be 
excluded from markets because of its refusal to formally become a Cooperating 
Non-Member of the Extended Commission. 
119. The Extended Commission agreed to invoke Paragraph 1 of the Action Plan for 
China.  The Executive Secretary will write to China, advising China of the 
Action Plan and seeking its cooperation with the CCSBT. 
120. Australia noted that only a small percentage of the Indonesia SBT ends up on the 
Japanese market and requested further information on the destination of 
Indonesian caught SBT.  Indonesia and the Executive Secretary advised that 
export reject SBT is both canned and sold on the fresh fish market in Indonesia.  
 
Agenda Item 18. 
Ecologically Related Species (ERS) 
121. Discussion was held on the need for the Ecologically Related Species Working 
Group (ERSWG) to provide management related advice to the Extended 
Commission on ERS matters.  Items 4, 5 and 6 of the ERSWG terms of reference 
allows for the provision of such advice. It was also noted that if advice was not 
forthcoming from the ERSWG, then consideration would need to be given as to 
 
whether it would be better to discuss ERS issues as part of annual meetings of the 
Extended Commission than as a stand alone group.  
122. The SC Chair advised that SC9 noted the similarity in debates taking place at the 
ERSWG and the SC regarding data requirements for addressing the respective 
terms of reference of these groups and problems associated with providing by-
catch data.  SC9 agreed that “there is increasing awareness of the need for data 
on other species by-catch to understand important issues related to fleet 
behaviour patterns and their effects on SBT management”.  Mr Penney also 
advised that: 
• The most important part of the CCSBT Scientific Research Plan 
(Characterisation of the SBT Catch) recommends the collection of information 
on the catch of other tuna and other tuna like species, but that there has been 
no progress on agreeing to the provision of by-catch data as part of the regular 
data submission requirements. 
• This issue on provision of data on bycatch species has been tossed back and 
forward between ERSWG and SC and no progress has been made. The SC had 
therefore referred this issue to the Commission for their attention.  The SC 
also requested that the importance of these data be brought to the attention of 
the ERSWG. 
• The recommended MP relies on CPUE data in making TAC recommendations.  
Changes in targeting that may impact on the CPUE therefore need to be well 
understood so that we do not incorrectly interpret changes in CPUE. 
123. There was general agreement on the importance of information on bycatch 
species to aid with interpretation of CPUE data. 
 
Agenda Item 19. 
Research Mortality Allowance 
124. Members agreed to the Research Mortality Allowance (RMA) and SRP Mortality 
Allowance (SRPMA) proposals for 2005/06 that were specified in CCSBT-
EC/0510/21.  These are: 
• RMA – Japan (1 tonne); 
• SRPMA – CCSBT surface fishery tagging (8 tonnes); 
• SRPMA – Japan’s high seas tagging (10 tonnes); 
• SRPMA – Australia’s archival tagging in its east coast fishery and the eastern 
Indian Ocean (15 tonnes); 
• SRPMA – Australia’s Global Spatial Dynamics Archival Tagging Program 
(12 tonnes); 
• SRPMA – New Zealand’s participation in the Australia’s Global Spatial 
Dynamics Archival Tagging Program (5 tonnes) 
 
Agenda Item 20. 
Activities with Other Organisations 
125. Members endorsed the activities and interactions with other organisations 
proposed in CCSBT-EC/0510/22.  Taiwan considered that attendance of the 
 
Secretariat at the Review Conference of the UN Fish Stocks Agreement in 2006 
and its PrepCon in New York in March and May 2006 were particularly 
important. 
126. The Extended Commission agreed that the CCSBT should have the primary 
responsibility for managing SBT throughout its range when there is an overlap in 
responsibility between RFMO’s.  This principle has previously been agreed with 
the IOTC and ICCAT.  The Extended Commission agreed that the Executive 
Secretary would correspond with both CCAMLR and the Western and Central 
Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) on this issue seeking their agreement 
that CCSBT have the primary management responsibility for SBT.  It was noted 
that the vessels approved by the CCSBT to fish for SBT are recorded on the 
CCSBT authorised vessel list which is publicly available on the CCSBT web site.  
It is therefore a simple matter for other RFMOs to identify vessels that have been 
approved to fish for SBT. 
 
Agenda Item 21. 
Program of Work for 2006 
127. The agreed program of work for 2006 is at Attachment 10. 
 
Agenda Item 22. 
Confidentiality of Commission Documents 
128. The Extended Commission agreed that all documents produced for CCSBT 12, 
with the exception of the national report from Korea, could be made publicly 
available. 
 
Agenda Item 23. 
Other Business 
129. The Extended Commission noted the two papers submitted by Australia 
(CCSBT-EC/0510/25) and Japan (CCSBT-EC/0510/29).  The Extended 
Commission welcomed the decision of Australia and Japan that independent 
reviews will be undertaken of the Japanese SBT market data anomalies and the 
Australian SBT farming operation anomalies at Port Lincoln to determine 
whether or not over-catching is occurring relative to the total allowable catch, 
and if it is occurring, over what period the over-catch has occurred and the source 
of the over-catch.   
130. The reviews will also include the current catch monitoring and reporting 
arrangements in the Australian SBT farming operation and Japanese SBT fishery, 
and other relevant SBT fisheries, to assess if over-catching is occurring and the 
suitability and accuracy of that monitoring and reporting.    
131. The results from the independent reviews will be submitted to the Extended 
Scientific Committee and Extended Commission, including, if applicable, the 
size and age structure of any over-catch, so that this information can be included 
in a revised stock assessment. 
132. The reviews will be conducted in such a way as to ensure transparency, 
independence and accuracy.  The reviews will be undertaken by panels agreed by 
 
Australia and Japan and to be supported by the Extended Commission.  The 
Members of the Extended Commission stated their intention to cooperate fully 
with the independent review panels. 
133. The Extended Commission noted that the time of the independent reviews is 
critical and should start as soon as practicable, and be finalised by 30 June 2006 
at the latest in order that the Extended Scientific Committee can assess the results 
and the Extended Commission may make decisions on the results and advice at 
the 2006 annual meeting. 
 
Agenda Item 24. 
Close of Meeting 
24.1  Election of Chair and Vice-Chair for the 5th Meeting of the Extended 
Commission 
134. The Extended Commission agreed that Japan should host and Chair the Fifth 
Meeting of the Extended Commission, and Australia will act as Vice-Chair.  
Japan advised it would nominate a person soon.  Australia nominated Mr Glen 
Hurry. 
135. For the Special Meeting the Extended Commission will agree on a Chair 
intersessionally early in 2006. 
 
24.2  Adoption of Report 
136. The report was adopted. 
 
24.3  Close of meeting 
137. The meeting closed at 5:45 pm, 14 October 2005. 
 
 
 
 
List of Attachments 
 
Attachment 
 
1 
List of Participants 
2 
Agenda 
3  
List of Documents 
4 
Opening Statements by Members 
5  
Opening Statements by Cooperating Non Members 
6 
Opening Statements by Other States and Entities 
7 
Revised budget for 2004 and budget for 2005 
8 
Review of SBT Fisheries – Reports from Members of the Extended 
Commission and Cooperating Non Members 
9 
Report of the Scientific Committee 
10 
CCSBT Workplan for 2006 
 
 
Attachment 1 
 
List of Participants 
Extended Commission of the Twelfth Annual Meeting of the Commission 
11-14 October 2005 
Taipei, Taiwan 
 
 
CHAIR 
 
Mr. James SHA 
Deputy Director-General 
Fisheries Agency  
No.2, Chaochow St. 
TAIPEI, TAIWAN 100 
Phone: +886 2 3343 6012 
Fax: 
+886 2 2341 1953 
Email: james@ms1.fa.gov.tw 
 
 
SC CHAIR  
 
Mr Andrew PENNEY 
Pisces Environmental Services (Pty) Ltd 
22 Forest Glade 
Tokai Road, Tokai 7945 
South Africa 
Phone: +27 21 7154238 
Fax: 
+27 21 7150563 
Email: apenney@pisces.co.za 
 
 
AUSTRALIA 
 
Mr Glenn HURRY 
(Head of Delegation) 
A/g Executive Manager 
Fisheries & Forestry 
Dept. of Agriculture, Fisheries & Forestry 
GPO Box 858, Canberra ACT 2601 
Phone: +61 2 6272 5777 
Fax: 
+61 2 6272 4875 
Email: Glenn.Hurry@daff.gov.au 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr James FINDLAY 
A/g Program Leader 
Fisheries & Marine Science Program 
Bureau of Rural Science 
Dept. of Agriculture, Fisheries & Forestry 
GPO Box 858 Canberra ACT 2601 
Phone: +61 2 6272 5534 
Fax: 
+61 2 6272 3882 
Email: James.Findlay@brs.gov.au 
 
Mr Stephen ROWCLIFFE 
International Fisheries 
Dept. of Agriculture, Fisheries & Forestry 
GPO Box 858, Canberra ACT 2601 
Phone: +61 2 6272 3871 
Fax: 
+61 2 6272 4875 
Email: Stephen.Rowcliffe@daff.gov.au 
 
Mr Andrew BUCKLEY 
International Fisheries 
Dept. of Agriculture, Fisheries & Forestry 
GPO Box 858  
Canberra ACT 2602 
Phone: +61 2 6272 4647 
Fax: 
+61 2 6272 4875  
Email: Andrew.Buckley@daff.gov.au 
 
Dr John GUNN 
Deputy Chief 
Marine and Atmospheric Research 
CSIRO 
GPO Box 1538 
Hobart, TAS 1538 
Phone: +61 3 6232 5375 
Fax: 
+61 3 6232 5125 
Email: John.Gunn@csiro.au 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr Richard McLOUGHLIN 
Managing Director 
Australian Fisheries Management Authority 
PO Box 7051 
Canberra Mail Centre 
Canberra, ACT 2610 
Phone: +61 2 6272  4668 
Fax: 
+61 2 6272  5036 
Email: Richard.Mcloughlin@afma.gov.au 
 
Ms Trysh STONE 
Senior Manager 
Tuna & International 
Australian Fisheries Management Authority 
PO Box 7051 
Canberra Mail Centre 
Canberra, ACT 2610 
Phone: +61 2 6272  5381 
Fax: 
+61 2 6272  4614 
Email: Trysh.Stone@afma.gov.au 
 
Mr Andrew McNEE 
Assistant Secretary 
Marine Environment Branch 
Dept. of Environment and Heritage 
GPO Box 787 
Canberra, ACT 2601 
Phone: +61 2 6274  2462 
Fax: 
+61 2 6274 1542 
Email: Andrew.McNee@deh.gov.au 
 
Mr Philip KIMPTON 
Executive Officer 
Dept. of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
R G Casey Building 
John McEwen Crescent 
Phone: +61 2 6261 3124 
Fax: 
+61 2 6261 2144 
Email: Philip.Kimpton@dfat.gov.au 
 
Mr Brian JEFFRIESS 
President 
Tuna Boat Owners Association  
PO Box 416 
Fullarton, SA 5063 
Phone: +61 8 8373 2507 
Fax: 
+61 8 8373 2508 
Email: austuna@bigpond.com 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr Benedictu D HUR 
Managing Director 
Dae Young Fisheries P/L 
Unit 9/240, Longueville Rd. 
Lane Cove 
NSW 2066 
Phone: +61 2 9420 4002 
Fax: 
+61 2 9420 3834 
Email: daeyoung@bigpond.net.au 
 
Mr Yong Man KIM 
Ship Agencies Australia 
PO Box 1093 
Fremantle WA 6959 
Phone: +61 2 9789 3577 
Fax: 
+61 2  
Email: kimsan@saa.com.au 
 
Mr Murray KONARIK 
Managing Director 
MG Kalis Seafoods 
50 Mews St. 
Fremantle WA 6959 
Phone: +61 8 9239 9217 
Fax: 
+61 8 9239 9222 
Email: murraykonarik@kalis.com.au 
 
Mr Shane PHILLIPS 
Stolt Sea Farm P/L 
PO Box 1607 
Port Lincoln, SA 5606 
Phone: +61 8 8682 5577 
Fax: 
+61 8 8682 6593 
Email: shane.phillips@stoltseafarm.com 
 
Mr Joe PUGLISI 
Stolt Sea Farm P/L 
17 Blacker Court 
Port Lincoln, SA 5606 
Phone: +61 8 8682 8777 
Fax: 
+61 8 8682 8776 
Email: dojopuglisi@bigpond.com 
 
Mr Terry ROMARO 
Managing Director 
Ship Agencies Australia 
PO Box 1093  
Fremantle WA 6959 
Phone: +61 8 9335 5499 
Fax: 
+61 8 9335 5045 
Email:  terry@saa.com.au 
 
 
Mr Tony SANTIC 
Tony’s Tuna International 
Pine Freezer Rd 
Port Lincoln, SA 5606 
Phone: +61 8 8682 2266 
Fax: 
+61 8 8683 0646 
Email: tuna@tonystuna.com.au 
 
Mr Michael THOMAS 
Australian Fishing Enterprises P/L 
PO Box 1073 
Port Lincoln, SA 5606 
Phone: +61 8 8682 5711 
Fax: 
+61 8 8682 6987 
Email: afe1@bigpond.com 
 
Mr Mario VALCIC 
Marnikol Fisheries P/L 
PO Box 10 
Port Lincoln, SA 5606 
Phone: +61 8 8683 3900 
Fax: 
+61 8 8683 3988 
Email: marnikol@bigpond.net.au 
 
 
FISHING ENTITY OF TAIWAN 
 
Mr Hong-Yen HUANG 
(Head of Delegation) 
Deputy Director 
Planning Division 
Fisheries Agency  
No.2, Chaochow St. 
Taipei, TAIWAN 100 
Phone: +886 2 3343 6021 
Fax: 
+886 2 3343 6268 
Email: hangyen@ms1.fa.gov.tw 
 
Mr Azmi CHANG 
Director on Home Assignment 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
2, Kaitakelan Blvd.   
Taipei, TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2348 2029 
Fax: 
+886 2 2389 6314 
Email: awlchang@mofa.gov.tw 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr Jung-Yung CHEN 
Director on Home Assignment 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
2, Kaitakelan Blvd.   
Taipei, TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2348 2544 
Fax: 
+886 2 2361 7694 
Email: jychen@mofa.gov.tw 
 
Mr Kuo-Ching PU 
Assistant Director-General 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
2, Kaitakelan Blvd.   
Taipei, TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2348 2222 
Fax: 
+886 2 2312 1161 
Email: kcpu@mofa.gov.tw 
 
Mr Shinn-Charng WU 
Senior Specialist 
Fisheries Agency  
No.2, Chaochow St. 
Taipei, TAIWAN 100 
Phone: +886 2 3343 6113 
Fax: 
+886 2 3343 6268 
Email: shicharn@ms1.fa.gov.tw 
 
Mr Cho-Jan TENG 
Unit Chief 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
2, Kaitakelan Blvd.   
Taipei, TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2348 2542 
Fax: 
+886 2 2361 7694 
Email: cjteng@mofa.gov.tw 
 
Mr Shue-i HUANG 
Section Chief 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
2, Kaitakelan Blvd.   
Taipei, TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2348 2824 
Fax: 
+886 2 2389 6314 
Email: sihuang@mofa.gov.tw 
 
Ms Li-Fang HUANG 
Section Chief 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
2, Kaitakelan Blvd.   
Taipei, TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2348 2526 
Fax: 
+886 2 2361 7694  
Email: lfhuang@mofa.gov.tw 
 
Mr Yu-Yi HUANG 
Section Chief 
Fisheries Agency  
No.2, Chaochow St. 
Taipei, TAIWAN 100 
Phone: +886 2 3343 6037 
Fax: 
+886 2 3343 6268 
Email: yuyi@ms1.fa.gov.tw 
 
Mr Ted Tien-Hsiang TSAI 
Section Chief 
Fisheries Agency  
No.2, Chaochow St. 
Taipei, TAIWAN 100 
Phone: +886 2 3343 6119 
Fax: 
+886 2 3343 6268 
Email: ted@ms1.fa.gov.tw 
 
Ms Shiu-Ling LIN 
Specialist 
Fisheries Agency 
No.2, Chaochow St., 
Taipei, TAIWAN 100 
Taiwan 
Phone: +886 2 3343 6129 
Fax: 
+886 2 3343 6268 
Email: shiuling@ms1.fa.gov.tw 
 
Ms Catherine Ruhuei CHENG 
Desk Officer 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
2, Kaitakelan Blvd.   
Taipei, TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2348 2830 
Fax: 
+886 2 2389 6314  
Email: rhccheng@mofa.gov.tw 
 
Mr Han-Ching LIU 
Second Secretary on Home Assignment 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
2, Kaitakelan Blvd.   
Taipei, TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2348 2268 
Fax: 
+886 2 2361 7694  
Email: hcliu@mofa.gov.tw 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ms Wenlin CHENG 
Second Secretary on Home Assignment 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
2, Kaitakelan Blvd.   
Taipei, TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2348 2545 
Fax: 
+886 2 2361 7694  
Email: wecheng@mofa.gov.tw 
 
Mr Yu SHANG 
Second Secretary on Home Assignment 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
2, Kaitakelan Blvd.   
Taipei, TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2348 2527 
Fax: 
+886 2 2361 7694  
Email: yshang@mofa.gov.tw 
 
Mr Samuel S.S.LIU 
Second Secretary on Home Assignment 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
2, Kaitakelan Blvd.   
Taipei, TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2348 2528 
Fax: 
+886 2 2361 7694  
Email: ssliu@mofa.gov.tw 
 
Mr. Peter S.C. HO 
President 
Overseas Fisheries Development Council 
19 Lane 113, Sec.4, 
Roosevelt Rd, Taipei 106 
TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2738 2478(EXT.100) 
Fax: 
+886 2 2738 4329 
Email: pscho@ofdc.org.tw 
 
Professor Chin-Hwa SUN (Jenny) 
Professor and Director 
Institute of Applied Economics,  
National Taiwan Ocean University 
2 Pei-Ning Road, Keelung  20224  
Taiwan 
Phone: +886 2 2462 2324 
Fax: 
+886 2 2462 7396 
Email:  jsun@mail.ntou.edu.tw 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr Huang-Chih CHIANG 
Associate Professor 
Law School 
National Taiwan University 
No.1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Rd. 
Taipei, TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2351 9641 
Fax: 
+886 2 2351 7301 
Email: una144@sun4.cpu.edu.tw 
 
Mr. Bryan YEN 
Secretary 
Overseas Fisheries Development Council 
19 Lane 113, Sec.4, 
Roosevelt Rd, Taipei 106 
TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2738 1522(EXT.136) 
Fax: 
+886 2 2738 4329 
Email: bryanyen@ofdc.org.tw 
 
Mr Hsin-Wei KO 
Secretary 
Overseas Fisheries Development Council 
19 Lane 113, Sec.4, 
Roosevelt Rd, Taipei 106 
TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2738 1522(EXT.133) 
Fax: 
+886 2 2738 4329 
Email: hsinwei@ofdc.org.tw 
 
Ms Lucy LIN 
Fisheries Satatistician 
Overseas Fisheries Development Council 
19 Lane 113, Sec.4, 
Roosevelt Rd, Taipei 106 
TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2738 1522(EXT.123) 
Fax: 
+886 2 2738 4329 
Email: lucylin@ofdc.org.tw 
 
Mr. Shyh-Jium WANG 
Fisheries Statistician 
Overseas Fisheries Development Council 
19 Lane 113, Sec.4, 
Roosevelt Rd, Taipei 106 
TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2738 1522(EXT.116) 
Fax: 
+886 2 2738 4329 
Email: shyhjium@ofdc.org.tw 
 
 
 
 
Mr Wen-Jung HSIEH 
Chairman of Indian Ocean Operational 
Committee 
Taiwan Deep Sea Tuna Boat-Owners and 
Exporters Association 
3F-2, No.2 Yu-Kang Middle 1st Rd. 
Kaohsiung, TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 7 8312151 
Fax: 
+886 7 8417519 
Email: siunion.fishery@msa.hinet.net 
 
Mr I-Chih HUNG 
Secretary 
Taiwan Deep Sea Tuna Boat-Owners and 
Exporters Association 
3F-2, No.2 Yu-Kang Middle 1st Rd. 
Kaohsiung, TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 7 8419606 
Fax: 
+886 7 8313304 
Email: allen@tuna.org.tw 
 
Mr Kuan-Ting LEE 
Secretary 
Taiwan Deep Sea Tuna Boat-Owners and 
Exporters Association 
3F-2, No.2 Yu-Kang Middle 1st Rd. 
Kaohsiung, TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 7 8419606(EXT.21) 
Fax: 
+886 7 8313304 
Email: simon@tuna.org.tw 
 
 
JAPAN 
 
Mr Yoshimi SUENAGA 
(Head of Delegation)  
Councillor 
Fisheries Agency of Japan 
1-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100-8907 
Phone: +81 3 3591 2045 
Fax: 
+81 3 3502 0571 
Email: yoshimi_suenaga@nm.maff.go.jp 
 
Mr Takaaki SAKAMOTO 
Assistant Director 
Fisheries Agency of Japan 
1-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100-8907 
Phone: +81 3 3591 1086 
Fax: 
+81 3 3502 0571 
Email: takaaki_sakamoto@nm.maff.go.jp 
 
 
Mr Shingo KUROHAGI 
Deputy Director 
Fisheries Agency 
1-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100-8907 
Phone: +81 3 3502 8479 
Fax: 
+81 3 3591 5824 
Email: shingo_kurohagi@nm.maff.go.jp 
 
Mr Katsumasa MIYAUCHI 
Planner 
Fisheries Agency of Japan 
1-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100-8907 
Phone: +81 3 3591 6582 
Fax: 
+81 3 3595 7332 
Email:  km3120@hotmail.com 
 
Dr Naozumi MIYABE 
Section Chief 
Biological Mathematics Section 
National Research Institute of 
Far Seas Fisheries 
5-7-1 Shimizu-Orido, Shizuoka 424-8633 
Phone: +81 543 36 6014 
Fax: 
+81 543 35 9642 
Email: miyabe@fra.affrc.go.jp 
 
Dr Tomoyuki ITOH 
Senior Researcher 
Temperate Tuna Section 
National Research Institute of 
Far Seas Fisheries 
5-7-1 Shimizu-Orido, Shizuoka 424-8633 
Phone: +81 543 36 6043 
Fax: 
+81 543 35 9642 
Email: itou@affrc.go.jp 
 
Mr Hideto WATANABE 
Fisheries Division 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
2-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100-8917 
Phone: +81 3 5501 8338 
Fax: 
+81 3 5501 8332 
Email: hideo.watanabe@mofa.go.jp 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr Noriyuki SUZUKI 
Adviser 
Federation of Japan Tuna Fisheries 
Cooperative Associations 
3-22 Kudankita 2-chome, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 102-0073 
Phone: +81 3 3264 6167 
Fax: 
+81 3 3234 7455 
Email: gyojyo@japantuna.or.jp 
 
Mr Tokuichi NISHIKAWA 
Adviser 
Federation of Japan Tuna Fisheries 
Cooperative Associations 
3-22 Kudankita 2-chome, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 102-0073 
Phone: +81 3 3264 6167 
Fax: 
+81 3 3234 7455 
Email: gyojyo@japantuna.or.jp 
 
Mr Hiroshi HANEDA 
Adviser 
Federation of Japan Tuna Fisheries 
Cooperative Associations 
3-22 Kudankita 2-chome, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 102-0073 
Phone: +81 3 3264 6167 
Fax: 
+81 3 3234 7455 
Email: gyojyo@japantuna.or.jp 
 
Mr Osamu SHIRAKAWA 
Advisor 
Federation of Japan Tuna Fisheries 
Cooperative Associations 
3-22 Kudankita 2-chome, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 102-0073 
Phone: +81 3 3264 6167 
Fax: 
+81 3 3234 7455 
Email: gyojyo@japantuna.or.jp 
 
Mr Hiroaki KATSUKURA 
Adviser 
Federation of Japan Tuna Fisheries 
Cooperative Associations 
3-22 Kudankita 2-chome, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 102-0073 
Phone: +81 3 3264 6167 
Fax: 
+81 3 3234 7455 
Email: gyojyo@japantuna.or.jp 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr Kimio NISHIKAWA 
Adviser  
Federation of Japan Tuna Fisheries 
Cooperative Associations 
3-22 Kudankita 2-chome, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 102-0073 
Phone: +81 3 3264 6167 
Fax: 
+81 3 3234 7455 
Email: gyojyo@japantuna.or.jp 
 
Mr Tatsuya HAYASAKI 
Adviser 
Federation of Japan Tuna Fisheries 
Cooperative Associations 
3-22 Kudankita 2-chome, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 102-0073 
Phone: +81 3 3264 6167 
Fax: 
+81 3 3234 7455 
Email: gyojyo@japantuna.or.jp 
 
Mr Masahiro ISHIKAWA 
President 
Federation of Japan Tuna Fisheries 
Cooperative Associations 
3-22 Kudankita 2-chome, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 102-0073 
Phone: +81 3 3264 6167 
Fax: 
+81 3 3234 7455 
Email: gyojyo@japantuna.or.jp 
 
Mr Nozomu MIURA 
Section Chief 
International Division 
Federation of Japan Tuna Fisheries 
Cooperative Associations 
3-22 Kudankita 2-chome, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 102-0073 
Phone: +81 3 3264 6167 
Fax: 
+81 3 3234 7455 
Email: miura@japantuna.or.jp 
 
Mr Toshiaki KANAZAWA 
Director 
National Ocean Tuna Fisheries Association 
Coop Bldg 7F 
1-1-12 Uchikanda, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 101-8503 
Phone: +81 3 3294 9633 
Fax: 
+81 3 3296 1397 
Email: k-higaki@zengyoren.jf-net.ne.jp 
 
 
 
Mr Kosuke HIGAKI 
Manager 
National Ocean Tuna Fisheries Association 
Coop Bldg 7F 
1-1-12 Uchikanda, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 101-8503 
Phone: +81 3 3294 9633 
Fax: 
+81 3 3296 1397 
Email: k-higaki@zengyoren.jf-net.ne.jp 
 
Mr Hiroaki Tomobe 
Director for Agricultural Affairs 
Interchange Association (JAPAN) Taipei 
Office 
Tong Tai Plaza., 28 Ching Cheng St. 
Taipei 
Phone: +886 2 2713 8000(EXT2703) 
Fax: 
+886 2 2713 0848 
Email: tomobe@mail.japan-taipei.org.tw 
 
 
NEW ZEALAND 
 
Ms Emma WATERHOUSE 
(Head of Delegation) 
Senior Adviser 
Ministry of Fisheries 
PO Box 1020, Wellington 
Phone: +64 4 470 2644 
Fax: 
+64 4 470 2596 
Email: emma.waterhouse@fish.govt.nz 
 
Mr. Arthur HORE 
Senior Fisheries Manager 
Ministry of Fisheries 
PO Box 1020, Wellington 
Phone: +64 9 820 7686 
Fax: 
+64 9 820 1980 
Email: arthur.hore@fish.govt.nz 
 
Ms Jen MCDONALD 
Deputy Director 
Legal Division 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
Private Bag 18901, Wellington 
Phone: +64 4 439 8430 
Fax: 
+64 4 439 8103 
Email: jen.mcdonald@mfat.govt.nz 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ms Amy LAURENSON 
Legal Adviser 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
Private Bag 18901, Wellington 
Phone: +64 4 439 8340 
Fax: 
+64 4 439 8103 
Email: amy.laurenson@mfat.govt.nz 
 
Dr Shelton HARLEY 
Principal Scientist 
Ministry of Fisheries 
PO Box 1020, Wellington 
Phone: +64 4 494 8267 
Fax: 
+64 4 494 8261 
Email: shelton.harley@fish.govt.nz 
 
Mr Charles HUFFLETT 
Chairman 
Solander Group 
PO Box 5041, Cross Quay 
Port Nelson 
Phone: +64 3 545 9652 
Fax: 
+64 3 545 9651 
Email: cch@solander.co.nz 
 
Ms Clare FEARNLEY 
Director 
NZ Commerce & Industry Office 
Suite 2501, 25 F 
No.333 Keelung Road 
Section 1, Hsinyi District 
TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2757 6725 
Fax: 
+886 2 2757 6973 
Email: clare.fearnley@mfat.govt.nz 
 
Mr Robert KAIWAI 
Deputy Director 
NZ Commerce & Industry Office 
Suite 2501, 25 F 
No.333 Keelung Road 
Section 1, Hsinyi District 
TAIWAN 
Phone: +886 2 2757 6725 
Fax: 
+886 2 2757 6973 
Email: robert.kaiwai@mfat.govt.nz 
 
 
 
 
 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA 
 
Mr. Ki Hiok BARNG 
(Head of delegation) 
Director General 
Ministry of Maritime Affairs and Fisheries 
140-2 Gye-Dong, Jongno-Gu 
Seoul 110-793 
Phone: +82 2 3674 6150 
Fax: 
+82 2 3674 6996 
Email: khbarng@momaf.go.kr 
 
Mr Oh Seung KWON 
Assistant Director 
Ministry of Maritime Affairs and Fisheries 
140-2 Gye-Dong, Jongno-Gu 
Seoul 110-793 
Phone: +82 2 3674 6994 
Fax: 
+82 2 3674 6996 
Email: kos20@momaf.go.kr 
 
Dr Kyu Jin SEOK 
Scientist 
Ministry of Maritime Affairs and Fisheries 
140-2 Gye-Dong, Jongno-Gu 
Seoul 110-793 
Phone: +82 2 3674 6994 
Fax: 
+82 2 3674 6996 
Email: icdmomaf@chol.com 
 
Dr Dae Yeon MOON 
Director 
National Fisheries Research &  
Development Institute 
408-1 Shirang-ri, Gijang-Up 
Gijian-Gun, Busan 619-902 
Phone: +82 51 720 2310 
Fax: 
+82 51 720 2337 
Email: dymoon@nfrdi.re.kr 
 
Mr Chi Gon KIM 
General Manager 
Sajo Industries Co., Ltd. 
157, 2ga, Chungjeong-ro 
Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 
Phone: +82 2 3277 1650 
Fax: 
+82 2 365 6079 
Email: tunaone@sajo.co.kr 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr Hudson KIM  
Managing Director 
Marine Plus co., LTD 
Daesung  B/D 37-7 Jamwon-dong, 
Seocho-ku  Seoul, Korea 
Phone: +82 2 548 9901 
Fax: 
+82 2 548 8802 
Email: hudkim@hotmail.com 
 
Mr Yu Seok YUN 
General Manager 
Dongwon Industries Co., Ltd. 
275, Yangjae-dong, Seocho-gu 
Seoul 
Phone: +82 2 589 3306 
Fax: 
+82 2 589 4397 
Email: ysyun@dw.co.kr 
 
Ms. Hyeon-Ai Shin 
Assistant Manager 
Korea Deep Sea Fisheries Association  
6fl. Samho Mulsan Building “A” 275-1, 
Yangjae-don, Seoul 
Phone: +82 2 589 1614 
Fax: 
+82 2 589 1630 
Email:  fleur@kodefa.or.kr 
 
 
 
Cooperating non-member 
 
PHILIPPINES 
 
Ambassador Alberto ENCOMIENDA 
(Head of Delegation)  
 
Secretary-General 
Maritime and Ocean Affairs Center 
Department of Foreign Affairs 
Phone: +63 2 831 3177 
Fax: 
+63 2 831 4767 
Email: moac@dfa.gov.ph 
 
Mr Gil ADORA   
Regional Director 
Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic 
Resources 
Phone:  +63 2 321 1732 
Fax: 
+63 2 321 1732   
Email: bfan@yhoo.com 
  
Mr. Augusto NATIVIDAD 
Vice Chairman,  
Philippine Tuna Industry Council 
SR. Vice-President, Frabelle Fishing 
Corporation 
Nabvotas, Metro Manila 
Phone:   +63 2 281 3122 
Fax: 
 +63 2 282 2771 
Email: gus@frabelle.net 
 
Mr. Richard SY 
President 
Philippine International Longline Asso., 
Inc 
Rm. 701 Dasma Corporate Center 
321 Dasmarinas St. Binondo 
Manila 
Phone:   +63 2 244 5565 
Fax: 
 +63 2 244 5566 
E-mail: sunwarm@tri-isys.com 
 
 
Observer 
 
INDONESIA 
 
Mr Nilanto PERBOWO 
Secretary  
Directorate General of Capture Fisheries 
Ministry of Marine Affairs and Fisheries 
Phone: +62 21 351 9113 9070 
Fax: 
+62 21 351 9113 9070 
Email: perbowon@cbn.net.id 
 
Mr Parlin TAMBUNAN 
Director of Fisheries Resources 
Directorate General of Capture Fisheries 
Ministry of Marine Affairs and Fisheries 
Phone: +62 21 781 1672 
Fax: 
+62 21 781 1672 
Email: dfrmdgf@indosat.net.id 
 
Dr Purwito Martosubroto 
Chairman 
Indonesia Tuna Commission 
Ministry of Marine Affairs and Fisheries 
Phone: +62 21 352 1977 
Fax: 
+62 21 788 37808 
Email: sek_ti@yahoo.com 
 
 
CCSBT SECRETARIAT 
 
PO Box 37, Deakin West  ACT  2600 
AUSTRALIA 
Phone: +61 2 6282 8396 
Fax: 
+61 2 6282 8407 
 
Mr Brian MACDONALD 
Executive Secretary 
Email: bmacdonald@ccsbt.org 
 
Mr Yukito NARISAWA 
Deputy Executive Secretary 
Email: ynarisawa@ccsbt.org 
 
Mr Robert KENNEDY 
Database Manager 
Email: rkennedy@ccsbt.org 
 
INTERPRETERS 
 
Ms Saemi BABA 
 
Ms Kumi KOIKE 
 
Ms Megan SHIMOJI 
Attachment 2 
 
Agenda 
Extended Commission of the Twelfth Annual Meeting of the Commission 
11-14 October 2005 
Taipei, Taiwan 
 
 
1. 
Opening of the Meeting 
 
 
1.1  
Election of Chair and Vice-Chair for the Extended   
 
 
Commission of the Twelfth Meeting of the Commission 
 
 
1.2  
Adoption of Agenda 
 
 
1.3 
Opening Statements 
 
 
 
 
1.3.1 Members 
 
 
 
 
1.3.2 Cooperating non-members 
 
 
 
 
1.3.3 Other States and entities 
 
 
2.   
Report from the Secretariat 
 
 
3. 
Report from the Finance and Administration Committee 
 
 
4. 
Relationship with Non-members 
 
 
4.1 
 Indonesia 
 
 
4.2 
 South Africa 
 
 
4.3 
 Others 
 
 
 
5.  
Review of SBT Fisheries 
 
 
6. 
Report from the Extended Scientific Committee 
 
 
7. 
Total Allowable Catch and its Allocation 
 
 
7.1 
 Total Allowable Catch and its Allocation 
 
 
7.2 
 Other Measures 
 
 
8.  
Management Procedure 
 
 
9. 
Cooperating Non-members 
 
 
10. 
Indonesian Catch Monitoring 
 
 
11. 
Review of Regional Fisheries Management Bodies 
 
 
12. 
Catch Monitoring System 
 
 
12.1 
Catch Documentation Scheme 
 
 
12.2 
Trade Information Scheme 
 
 
12.3 
International Observer Program 
 
 
12.4 
Monthly Catch Reporting to the CCSBT 
 
 
12.5 
Reporting of Fine Scale Shot by Shot Data to the CCSBT 
 
 
13. 
Compliance Committee 
 
 
13.1 
Activation of Compliance Committee 
 
 
13.2 
International Boarding and Inspection Regime 
 
 
13.3 
CCSBT Administered Vessel Monitoring System 
 
 
13.4 
Review of CCSBT Vessel Register 
 
 
13.5 
Other Matters 
 
 
14. 
Quota Trading 
 
 
15. 
Intersessional Decisions 
 
 
16. 
Executive Secretary 
 
 
 
17. 
Action Plan 
 
 
18. 
Ecologically Related Species 
 
 
19. 
Research Mortality Allowance 
 
 
20. 
Activities with Other Organisations 
 
 
21. 
Program of Work for 2006 
 
 
22. 
Confidentiality of Commission Documents 
 
 
23.  
Other Business 
 
 
24. 
Close of Meeting 
 
 
24.1 
Election of Chair and Vice-Chair for the 5th Meeting of the  
 
 
Extended Commission  
 
 
24.2  Adoption of Report 
 
 
24.3  Close of meeting 
 
 
Attachment 3 
 
List of Documents 
The Extended Commission of the Twelfth Annual Meeting of the Commission 
 
(CCSBT-EC/0510/ ) 
01. Draft Agenda and the Annotation   
02. List of Participants of Extended Commission and CCSBT12 
03. Draft List of Documents 
04. (Secretariat) Report from the Secretariat 
05. (Secretariat) Revised 2005 Budget 
06. (Secretariat) Draft 2006 Budget 
07. (Secretariat) Relationship with Non-members  
08. (Secretariat) Review of SBT Fisheries  
09. (Secretariat) Report from the Extended Scientific Committee 
10. (Secretariat) Total Allowable Catch and its Allocation 
11. (Secretariat) Management Procedure 
12. (Secretariat) Cooperating Non-members 
13. (Secretariat) Indonesian Catch Monitoring 
14. (Secretariat) Review of Regional Fisheries Management Bodies 
15. (Secretariat) Catch Monitoring System 
16. (Secretariat) Quota Trading 
17. (Secretariat) Compliance Committee 
18. (Secretariat) Intersessional Decisions 
19. (Secretariat) Executive Secretary 
20. (Secretariat) Action Plan 
21.  (Secretariat) Research Mortality Allowance 
22. (Secretariat) Activities with Other Organisations 
23. (Secretariat) Program of Work for 2006 
24. (Secretariat) Confidentiality of Commission Documents 
25. (Australia) Comparison of CCSBT catch data with Japanese auction sales of frozen 
SBT  
26. (Australia) Implementation issues for the Management Procedure 
27. (SC Chair) Report of the 6th Meeting of the Stock Assessment Group and the 10th 
Meeting of the Scientific Committee 
 
 
28. (New Zealand) Arrangements for Adjusting for Overs and Unders.: 
29. (Japan) Preliminary analysis on growth rates of farmed SBT through trade data and 
other related information.: JFA 
 
(CCSBT-EC/0510/SBT Fisheries- ) 
Australia          - Australian’s Annul Review of the Southern Bluefin 
Tuna Fishery 
Fishing Entity of Taiwan 
     - Review of Taiwan’s SBT Fishery of 2003/2004 
Japan                       - Review of Japanese SBT Fisheries in the 2004 
Fishing Season 
New Zealand                 - Review of New Zealand SBT Fisheries 
Republic of Korea 
     - Review of Korean SBT Fishery 
Republic of the Philippines      - 2005 Philippine Report to CCSBT 
 
(CCSBT-EC/0510/Rep ) 
01. Report of the first Meeting of the Management Procedure Workshop (March 2002) 
02. Report of the Second Meeting of the Management Procedure Workshop (April 
2003) 
03. Report of the Indonesian Catch Monitoring Review Workshop (April 2003) 
04. Report of the Fourth Stock Assessment Group Meeting (August 2003) 
05. Report of the Eighth Meeting of the Scientific Committee (September 2003) 
06. Report of the Tenth Annual Meeting of the Commission (October 2003) 
07. Report of the Fifth Meeting of the Ecologically Related Species Working Group 
(February 2004) 
08. Report of the Third Meeting of the Management Procedure Workshop (April 2004) 
09. Report of the Special Meeting of the Commission (April 2004) 
10. Report of the Fifth Stock Assessment Group Meeting (September 2004) 
11. Report of the Ninth Meeting of the Scientific Committee (September 2004) 
12. Report of the Eleventh Annual Meeting of the Commission (October 2004) 
13. Report of the Special Management Procedure Technical Meeting (February 2005) 
14. Report of the Fourth Meeting of the Management Procedure Workshop (May 2005) 
15. Report of the Management Procedure Special Consultation (May 2005) 
16. Report of the Sixth Stock Assessment Group Meeting (August-September2005) 
17. Report of the Tenth Meeting of the Scientific Committee (September 2005) 
Attachment 4-1 
 
Opening Statement by Australia 
 
Good morning Chair, delegates, Mr Penney, Secretariat and interpreters 
 
My congratulations to you Chair and thanks to the Government and people of Taiwan for hosting 
this, the extended meeting of the 12th meeting of the CCSBT. This must be the 3rd of 4th time I have 
been to meetings in Taipei and it is always good to come back. 
 
Recent years have seen major progress on a range of important issues for the Commission 
facilitated by the engagement of a group of eminent independent scientists, increased research 
investment and improved relationships between the parties of CCSBT.  Many of the elements 
necessary to ensure the effectiveness of the Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin 
Tuna (CCSBT) are now in place and the foundations have been laid for a more constructive 
management of southern bluefin tuna (SBT) in the future.  
 
While difficult issues will be raised at CCSBT 12 a functioning Commission is the most effective 
way to ensure sustainability of SBT. 
 
The Australian Government is committed to rebuilding the southern bluefin tuna (SBT) stock to 
ecologically sustainable levels. This requires work within the CCSBT to obtain agreement of 
members to a SBT spawning stock rebuilding objective and a Candidate Management Procedure to 
guide decision-making toward that objective. 
 
However to be effective the operations of the CCSBT as a Commission must be transparent and 
countries in accepting or endorsing decisions of the CCSBT must do so in an environment of trust, 
knowing that the decisions they take are supported by accurate and transparent and available data 
sources.  
 
At the end of the 1980’s, catch reduction decisions were taken by Australia, Japan and New Zealand 
to reduce the catch of SBT to rebuild the stocks.  The reductions were of such a magnitude that 
they should have made a difference and the stock should have rebounded. 
 
What happened? Apparently not much because on the best scientific advice available we now find 
ourselves in the same place, different players but facing the same decisions. 
 
The most fundamental question that the parties must ask themselves is why this initial catch 
reduction did not work??  
 
Over the last 6 months Australia has invested significant effort in analysing the SBT markets and 
has provided a paper that raises serious questions about the level of catch being reported as being 
sold against that being reported as being caught. 
 
This is public or open source information, the internet is a great modern tool. We are making no 
judgement as to who may be catching these fish at this stage but they are longline caught fish.  
 
Japan and Australia have discussed this issue and are continuing to discus the issue and will be able 
to report to Commission members on a way forward by Wednesday morning. If Suenaga-san and I 
can not report together on a way forward then we genuinely do have a problem that will not be easy 
to resolve. Timing in resolving this issue is critical and the momentum must be maintained to 
resolve this issue within the next 6 months.  
 
You will note that Japan has raised concerns about Australia’s reporting of its Port Lincoln catch. 
Given that Australia is very proud of the innovation and expertise in our specialist SBT farming 
industry, we would in the context of resolving the market discrepancies raised above, invited an 
external review of our operation at Port Lincoln and if practical suggestions can be made to improve 
our transparency and accountability then we would be prepared to adopt them.  This is real 
accountability and we expect no less from anyone else in this Commission. 
 
The key issues for Australia at this meeting include. 
• ensuring the membership of the CCSBT includes all nations taking SBT that have a 
legitimate historical association with the fishery; 
• dealing with the recommendations of the CCSBT Scientific Committee regarding TAC 
including the setting of a Total Allowable Catch (TAC) for the 2005/06 fishing season  
• agreement on a rebuilding objective for the SBT global fishery and interim objectives. 
• the adoption of a suitable MP and the framework needed for that adoption. 
• pursuing the protection of SBT spawning stock and spawning grounds from unregulated 
fishing pressures; 
• ensuring all take of SBT is monitored through a comprehensive catch documentation 
scheme (CDS); and 
Requirements for an effectively managed SBT fishery that can eliminate the unreported catch issue 
and assure the effective implementation of a management procedure requires significant progress 
towards implementing the following: 
o An effective Catch Documentation System (CDS). 
o A CCSBT Compliance Committee becomes operational including the provision of 
compliance reports with estimates of IUU and discards. 
o Implementation of a centralised vessel monitoring system. 
o The introduction of monthly catch and effort reporting to the CCSBT Secretariat at a 1x1 
level for all gear and the provision of fine scale historical catch and effort data for SBT 
and non target species. This data should be provided to the CCSBT Secretariat. 
o That an international observer programme for all CCSBT members is established in 2006. 
o That a vessel register review occurs and that the current vessel register is amended to 
ensure all vessels fishing and freighting vessels for SBT are included in the scheme. 
 
Other issues include the issue of quota trading between CCSBT members. 
• Managing the SBT catch in the Indonesian spawning grounds. 
• The design of the scientific research program. 
 
Glenn Hurry 
 
Attachment 4-2 
 
Opening Statement by the Fishing Entity of Taiwan 
 
Mr. Chairman, distinguished delegates, ladies and gentlemen 
 
Good Morning. It is a historical moment that an annual meeting of the Extended Commission of 
CCSBT is for the first time being held here in Taipei.  It is our pleasure to host this meeting, which 
is important for Taiwan to have the opportunity to tell the international community our efforts in 
contributing to conservation of global marine resources. I would also like to extend our thanks to 
the Executive Secretary, Mr. Brian Macdonald and his staff for their hard work in arranging this 
meeting.  
 
First of all, on behalf of my delegation, I would like to take this opportunity to extend our warmest 
welcome to all members of the Extended Commission, cooperating non-member the Republic of 
Philippines and observer from the Republic of Indonesia to attend this meeting. We will do the best 
we can to make your stay like at home, and enjoy the Taiwanese hospitality.  
 
Mr. Chairman, given highly sensitive alerts on some indicators with low recruitment, CCSBT has 
been placing high priority on the research of management procedure to avoid possible collapse of 
stock of southern bluefin tuna since 2001.  With the combined efforts from all over the past few 
years, we have achieved significant progress in this regard, with affirmative recommendation on the 
management of SBT by the Extended Scientific Committee last month together with some relevant 
associated comments from the 6th meeting of the Stock Assessment Group. We are very much 
concerned about the concluded outcome, which stands as an astonishing warning. We have to 
seriously considerate whether to take immediate reduction of allocations among members. Facing 
the undesirable circumstance, we are confident that all members of the Extended Commission can 
make the best decisions on TAC in this meeting to avoid the nightmare of stock collapse. Taking 
the same attitude as before, the Extended Commission shall take into account the benefits of all 
stakeholders when making decisions, but we also believe the management objectives in terms of the 
resources conservation of southern bluefin tuna shall be always at the top of our agenda. 
 
In refining the management procedure, there is no doubt that the data arising from the global 
dynamics- tagging program project, discerning the spatial distribution and movement of SBT 
juveniles would be very valuable in supporting the management objectives. One of the critical 
components is the collaboration among members and cooperating non-members. We hope a more 
flexible compromising arrangement could be come up in this meeting. 
 
Mr. Chairman, in our efforts to consolidate our management role on the conservation of southern 
bluefin tuna, we are concerned about that there remain some important range coastal states, which 
are still outside the management regime of the Commission. We hope all members could continue 
to convince all those fishing SBT to cooperate with the Commission in the conservation of SBT.  
 
Finally, we look forward to working together with all members over the next few days in producing 
fruitful results from the meeting. 
 
Thank you.
 
Attachment 4-3 
 
Opening Statement by Japan 
(Translated by the Secretariat) 
 
First of all, I would like to express my gratitude as a representative of the Japanese delegation to 
Taiwan and the people concerned for the arrangements made for this meeting. Regarding the 
holding this meeting, we appreciate the financial support provided by Taiwan. Also, I would like to 
express our appreciation to the Executive Secretary, Mr. Brian Macdonald and his staff for their 
effort in preparing and circulating the various meeting documents and logistics for the meeting. 
 
The Scientific Committee, in September 2005, again recognized the low recruitment of SBT stock 
and it has been estimated that the stock will decline further if current levels of catch are maintained. 
CCSBT has been working towards the sustainable use of SBT stock, and we have endured 
considerable TAC reductions since the CCSBT was established. Because of this, it was regrettable 
for us to learn of the current status of the stock. 
 
However, the choice of management procedure, which the Scientific Committee has developed to 
manage SBT stock, was narrowed to one at the Scientific Committee in September. We would like 
to express our high regard to the independent panel and national scientists for their continual efforts. 
We would like to express our opinion that the management procedure will be selected according to 
recommendation of the Scientific Committee at this meeting. 
 
Recently, southern bluefin tuna fisheries have suffered very difficult economic circumstances. This 
is not only our country, but also all other countries in the world because of the rise in oil prices and 
the fall in all tuna prices. And, at the same time our Convention requires us to secure optimum 
utilisation and conservation of the stock through proper management. 
 
In this context, CCSBT member countries should act to improve the status of our common SBT 
stock and take responsibility for the sustainable use and more stable management of SBT fishery 
industries. We think that members should work tirelessly and take steps together for the 
improvement of the SBT stock. 
 
Japan would like to restate its determination, as the traditional fishing nation and the biggest market 
country, to contribute positively with every method available to the conservation and management 
for SBT stock. 
 
Thank you. 
 
 
Attachment 4-4 
 
Opening Statement by New Zealand 
 
Good morning and thank you to our hosts, Taiwan, for welcoming us so warmly to Taipei.   
 
Mr Chair, there can be no doubt that this Commission is at a cross roads.  At a time when the 
international community is placing regional fisheries management organisations under increasing 
scrutiny, we are faced, at this meeting, with some very hard decisions. 
 
For the first time in the Commission’s history, our own Scientific Committee has recommended 
specific reductions in the total allowable catch for the southern bluefin tuna fishery.  Their advice 
is very clear.  It is very disturbing.  Take a substantial immediate reduction in the global TAC to 
provide any chance of keeping the biomass at the current levels, let alone rebuilding the fishery into 
the future.  Mr Chair, if such advice on a New Zealand fishery were brought before us in New 
Zealand, we would close the fishery.  We have done so in the past, we may in the future.  Such 
action is fully consistent with our obligations under the Law of the Sea Convention and the UN Fish 
Stocks Agreement.   
 
Mr Chair, the same principles apply here.  We will have before us the best scientific advice 
available.  That advice in unequivocal.  We must act.  We must act now.  To hide behind 
uncertainties in that science is not a valid excuse to delay taking firm and effective management 
action.  If we wait, it will be too late.  And if we fail at this hurdle, the international community 
will judge us poorly.  Let me remind this meeting of a fundamental principle of natural resource 
management – the precautionary principle.  This principle has been enshrined in international law 
and represents best practice in fisheries management, and requires that more caution is needed when 
information is uncertain, unreliable or inadequate.  The absence of adequate scientific information 
shall not be used as a reason for postponing or failing to take conservation and management 
measures.   
 
New Zealand strongly urges all members to heed the advice of the Scientific Committee.  To act in 
a manner consistent with the precautionary principle and as responsible fishing states to work 
within this Commission to address the perilous state of the SBT stock.  Mr Chair, New Zealand 
supports an immediate reduction in the global TAC as recommended by the Scientific Committee.  
We support the adoption of the management procedure and tuning levels recommended by the 
Scientific Committee.  New Zealand also sees a very clear need to review our catch reporting and 
monitoring systems and to stop procrastinating in our dealings with non-members.  We see a 
pressing need to review the governance and management arrangements within this Commission, to 
bring it into the 21st Century and ensure consistency with the provisions of the UN Fish Stocks 
Agreement.     
 
New Zealand is firmly of the view that to not heed the advice of our Scientific Committee would be 
irresponsible.  We ignore it at our peril.  This Commission must demonstrate to the international 
community, at this meeting, that it has the ability to address this crisis.  The integrity of CCSBT, 
and each of its members, is at stake.  New Zealand expects that the members of this Commission 
will show real leadership over the course of this week.  We expect that Commissioners will put 
aside vested self interests and that we will do the right thing, consistent with the collective 
obligation we all signed on to in becoming members of CCSBT.  We are obliged to act in a 
manner consistent with ensuring the sustainability of this fishery and the long-term economic and 
social benefits that accrue from it.   
 
Mr Chair, New Zealand is firmly committed to rebuilding the SBT stock over the long term.  We 
are committed to taking the very hard management decision to reduce the global TAC for 2006.  
We will not shy away from this responsibility.  This is the critical sustainability decision that the 
Commission must address at this meeting.  An important, and very separate, decision is the 
allocation of the TAC.  New Zealand cannot accept decisions on the allocation of any revised TAC 
that further compounds the inequity in our allocation.  It is our expectation that the Commission 
will honour the commitments it gave in both Christchurch and Pusan to resolving this outstanding 
issue.  
 
New Zealand has demonstrated its willingness to act collectively within this Commission.  We 
have compromised our own national interests in order to improve the effectiveness of CCSBT and 
the management of the SBT fishery.  We have done so in the firm belief that an inclusive 
Commission, which involves all those fishing for SBT, makes for a stronger Commission.   
 
As for own fishery, it has always been open to scrutiny, it always will be.  Our fisheries 
management systems are world leading.  We are deeply concerned therefore about any suggestion 
that others do not take their responsibilities seriously.  If this is indeed the case, then New 
Zealand’s compromises have been for nothing.   
 
Our commitment Mr Chair to resolving our allocation issue has never been so strong.  We expect 
resolution of this issue at this meeting.   
 
Finally, Mr Chair, New Zealand does not anticipate that this will be an easy meeting.  We are 
however in your capable hands.  We will be seeking a robust discussion.  A discussion that does 
not hide behind uncertainties in the science, a discussion that demonstrates that we are responsible 
fishing nations, a discussion that will be subject to the closest international scrutiny.  My 
delegation and I will be engaging in this meeting with these principles firmly in mind.  We urge 
others to do so too.  
 
 
Thank you. 
Attachment 4-5 
 
Opening Statement by the Republic of Korea 
 
Good morning! 
 
Honorable Chairman, Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen! 
 
This is a great pleasure to attend the 12th Annual Meeting of the CCSBT in Taipei. 
 
First, let me extend my sincere gratitude to the Secretariat for its hard works for the last one year.  
We, member countries also have been closely cooperated over many issues of the Commission. But 
I still consider that we should commit to making concerted efforts for the conservation and 
management of SBT.  
 
Korea hopes that the SBT stock should be managed through the adoption of management procedure 
to achieve the goal of restoring SBT resources.  Korea would do its best in adopting MP at this 
plenary, for promoting the scientific management and early restoration of the stock. 
 
It is expected that the TAC reduction would bring negative effect on the SBT industries for some 
time. But Korea supports that the TAC reduction should be implemented as early as possible, as it is 
essential to the stock restoration.  
 
In Korea’s view, it is reasonable that quota transfer also be allowed as early as possible, since the 
quota is within the sustainable range of resources.  Furthermore, as the MP may be adopted at this 
meeting, there is no proper reason to delay in introducing quota transfer. So Korea insists that the 
MP and quota transfer system be introduced at the same time. 
 
For those important agenda items of this meeting, my delegation will fully cooperate with other 
delegations during the course of meetings so that we can produce tangible results. 
 
Finally, I would like to express my warm appreciation to the government of Taiwan for their hard 
works and financial contributions in preparing this productive meeting. 
 
Thank you very much. 
Attachment 5 
 
Opening Statement by the Philippines 
 
 This meeting of the Extended Commission of the CCSBT marks the second year of the 
participation of the Philippines in the CCSBT as a cooperating non-member.  My delegation is 
pleased to be here in Taiwan for the 12th meeting and the opportunity to interact with the Extended 
Commission on the many concerns relating to the conservation and management of the Southern 
Bluefin Tuna (SBT). 
 
As a new participant in the CCSBT, my delegation considers itself still in the learning stage of the 
work program and processes, and concerns of the  CCSBT.  It welcomes the agenda of this meeting 
and especially looks forward our discussions on the review of SBT fisheries, the report of the 
Extended Scientific Committee, total allowable catch and its allocation, management procedure, 
cooperating non-members, catch monitoring, and quota trading. It anticipates active involvement in 
the future work of the Ecological Committee. 
 
As the only cooperating non-member of the CCSBT Commission as of date, the Philippines is 
pleased to note the proposed association of the cooperating non-member of the Extended 
Commission with that of the Commission as well. It looks forward to a favorable resolution in this 
question at this meeting. 
 
As regards the undertaking the Philippines made in applying for a cooperating non-member status 
in the Extended Commission, the Philippines has not exceeded its annual quota allocation of 50 
tonnes. Nonetheless, the Philippines wishes to reiterate its application for an increased quota to 
match its current SBT fishing capability. In expressing this desire, my delegation wishes to clarify 
that it does not in any way allude to increasing the total allowable catch given the bleak assessment 
of the Extended Scientific Committee as regard the status of SBT stocks. Rather, it reiterates its 
earlier suggestion for quota trading which at the moment seems to be the only acceptable equitable 
solution consistent with the sustainability objective of the SBT fisheries. 
 
Finally, as a cooperating Non-Member Party the Philippines reaffirm its commitments contained in 
the Exchange of Letters between the Philippines and the Commission. The Philippine delegation 
wishes to reiterate its suggestions on the inclusion of the topic of “considerations and concessions 
granted to developing countries by various Regional Fisheries Management Organizations” in the 
agenda on the annual meeting of the Extended Commission. The Philippines has forwarded its 
suggestion on this beginning the 10th Meeting of the Extended Commission and looks forward to 
the inclusion of this item in the future meetings. 
Attachment 6 
 
Opening Statement by Indonesia 
 
Chairman, 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen. 
 
First of all, on behalf of the Indonesian delegate, I would like to thank to the Executive Secretary 
for the Commission (for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna) for inviting us as an observer 
to the Annual Meeting of the Extended Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna 
and the Taiwanese for hosting this important meeting. 
 
Referring to the CCSBT Executive Secretary letter of 29 June and the reply of  the Indonesian 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 30 September 2005, may I reiterate that we are still need some 
preparation and assistance to meet the requirement of cooperating non-member.  
 
In this regard, I would like to inform the Extended Commission that Indonesia has been working to 
improve the fisheries statistical data collection in collaboration with the IOTC, CSIRO and OFCF. 
In the mean time Indonesia has established a Tuna Commission with the mandate to assist the 
government in the formulation of policy with regard to tuna fisheries. It is clear that Indonesia 
would like to work together with CCSBT in the management of the southern bluefin tuna even we 
are still not part of the commission yet. 
 
However, we would be happy to cooperate with all Commission member countries in strengthening 
our capabilities to fulfil the requirement to become a cooperating non-member in the near future.  
 
Meanwhile, our commitment to the regional tuna fisheries management as advocated by UNCLOS, 
is reflected by our participation at the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission as a non-contracting party 
and it will be a full member party very soon.  
 
To conclude this remarks, Indonesia would like to reiterate again that the process to become any 
regional or international organization will normally take sometimes and wish this meeting will 
consider our willingness to cooperate with all Commission member counties in managing the SBT 
fisheries in the region. 
 
Thank you. 
Attachment  7a-1
   COMMISSION FOR THE CONSERVATION OF SOUTHERN BLUEFIN TUNA
                                           REVISED GENERAL BUDGET - 2005 
INCOME 
2005 2005 Revised
Variation
Contributions from members
1,302,082
1,302,082
0
    Japan            
472,137
472,137
0
    Australia         
420,165
420,165
0
    New Zealand      
105,410
105,410
0
    Korea 
152,185
152,185
0
    Fishing Entity of Taiwan
152,185
152,185
0
Staff Assessment Levy
95,000
88,000
7,000
Carry over from 2004
166,412
166,412
0
Interest on investments
20,000
45,000
-25,000
Cash Reserve
83,986
83,986
0
Special Contribution from Taiwan
0
23,000
-23,000
    TOTAL GROSS INCOME
1,667,480
1,708,480
-41,000
EXPENDITURE
ANNUAL MEETINGS - ( CCSBT12)
96,630
97,000
-370
    Interpretation Costs
36,000
25,000
11,000
    Hire of venue
11,400
25,500
-14,100
    Hire of Equipment
11,000
16,000
-5,000
    Miscellaneous Costs (Inc. Sc Cte Chair attending Annual Meeting)
28,110
22,000
6,110
    Publication and Translation
3,000
3,000
0
    Indonesian Participants costs
3,620
2,500
1,120
    Small Meeting in Narita
3,500
3000
500
11th SC &  7th SAG
299,195
290,500
8,695
    Interpretation Costs
47,490
38,000
9,490
    Hire of venue
18,200
50,000
-31,800
    Hire of equipment
21,000
28,000
-7,000
    Hire of Consultants - SAG Chair, SC Chair, Advisory Panel
185,485
153,000
32,485
    Miscellaneous Costs 
14,000
9,000
5,000
    Publication and translation
7,000
7,000
0
    Indonesian participants costs
3,520
2,500
1,020
    Small Meeting in Narita
2,500
3000
-500
SUB-COMMITTEE MEETINGS
211,655
192,000
19,655
4th MP and SPECIAL MEETING
211,655
192,000
19,655
Special Project
180,000
195,500
-15,500
    Management Procedure Technical Workshop
         40,000
47500
-7,500
    Management Strategy Development
40000
48,000
-8,000
    Tagging program coordination
100000
100,000
0
SECRETARIAT COSTS
788,000
734,000
54,000
    Secretariat Staff Costs
450,000
420,000
30,000
    Staff Assessment Levy
95,000
88,000
7,000
    Employer Super/Social security
83,000
80,000
3,000
    Worker's Compensation/ travel/contents Insurance
21,000
22,000
-1,000
    Travel/transport   - O/seas and domestic
95,000
90,000
5,000
    Miscellaneous Translation of Commission and Committee Reports 
20,000
10,000
10,000
    Training
2,000
2,000
0
    home  leave allowance, repatriation grant and removal costs 
12,000
12,000
0
   Other employment expense
10,000
10,000
0
OFFICE  MANAGEMENT COSTS
92,000
87,000
5,000
    Office lease
37,000
32,000
5,000
    Office running costs               
32,000
32,000
0
    Provision for new/replacement assets
10,000
10,000
0
    Telephone/communications
9,000
9,000
0
    Miscellaneous
4,000
4,000
0
TOTAL GROSS EXPENDITURE
1,667,480
1,596,000
71,480
Attachment 7a-2 
                      COMMISSION FOR THE CONSERVATION OF SOUTHERN BLUEFIN TUNA
                  REVISED 2005 SPECIAL BUDGET - SRP TAGGING PROGRAM (Surface Fishery)
2005
INCOME 
Contributions from member
498,027
                           
    Japan 
180,586
                           
   Australia
160,707
                           
   Korea 
58,208
                             
   Fishing Entity of Taiwan
58,208
                             
   New Zealand
40,318
                             
Carry over from 2004 Special Fund for CCSBT surface fishery tagging program
25,750
                             
Proceeds from Special Fund for pilot east coast tagging program
50,223
                             
TOTAL GROSS INCOME
574,000
                           
EXPENDITURE
Tag Deployment
   vessel charter
329,000
                           
   tag application
242,006
                           
TOTAL GROSS EXPENDITURE
571,006
                           
Carryover to 2006
2,994
                               
Attachment 7b-1
   COMMISSION FOR THE CONSERVATION OF SOUTHERN BLUEFIN TUNA
                                     GENERAL BUDGET - 2006 (CCSBT13)
INCOME 
2007 Indicative
2,006 2005 Revised
Variation
Contributions from members
1,386,870
1,378,200
1,302,082
76,118
    Japan            
502,881
499,738
472,137
27,601
    Australia         
447,525
444,728
420,165
24,563
    New Zealand      
112,274
111,572
105,410
6,162
    Korea 
162,095
161,081
152,185
8,896
    Fishing Entity of Taiwan
162,095
161,081
152,185
8,896
Staff Assessment Levy
93,000
92,000
88,000
4,000
Carry over from 2005
0
112,500
166,412
-53,912
Interest on investments
40,000
40,000
45,000
-5,000
Cash Reserve
0
0
83,986
-83,986
Special Contribution from Taiwan
0
29,200
23,000
6,200
    TOTAL GROSS INCOME
1,519,870
1,651,900
1,708,480
-56,580
EXPENDITURE
ANNUAL MEETINGS ( CCSBT13) & Compliance Committee
134,700
97,000
37,700
    Interpretation Costs
33,500
25,000
8,500
    Hire of venue
44,100
25,500
18,600
    Hire of Equipment
47,000
16,000
31,000
    Miscellaneous Costs (Inc. Sc Cte Chair attending Annual Meeting)
19,600
22,000
-2,400
    Publication and Translation
7,000
3,000
4,000
    Indonesian Participants costs
3,500
2,500
1,000
    Financial support from Miyazaki Pref
-20,000
    Small Meeting in Narita
0
3,000
11th SC &  7th SAG
293,000
290,500
2,500
    Interpretation Costs
48,900
38,000
10,900
    Hire of venue
0
50,000
-50,000
    Hire of equipment
41,600
28,000
13,600
    Hire of Consultants - SAG Chair, SC Chair, Advisory Panel
178,000
153,000
25,000
    Miscellaneous Costs 
14,000
9,000
5,000
    Publication and translation
7,000
7,000
0
    Indonesian participants costs
3,500
2,500
1,000
    Small Meeting in Narita
0
3,000
SUB-COMMITTEE MEETINGS
71,200
192,000
-120,800
    4th MP & Special Consultation
0
192,000
    6th ERS Working Group 
71,200
0
71,200
Special Project
118,000
195,500
-77,500
    Management Procedure Technical Workshop
0
47,500
-47,500
    Management Strategy Development
8,000
48,000
-40,000
    Tagging program coordination
110,000
100,000
10,000
SECRETARIAT COSTS
940,000
734,000
206,000
    Secretariat Staff Costs
431,000
420,000
11,000
    Staff Assessment Levy
92,000
88,000
4,000
    Employer Super/Social security
78,000
80,000
-2,000
    Worker's Compensation/ travel/contents Insurance
21,000
22,000
-1,000
    Travel/transport   - O/seas and domestic
81,000
90,000
-9,000
    Miscellaneous Translation of Commission and Committee Reports 
20,000
10,000
10,000
    Training
2,000
2,000
0
   Home  leave allowance, repatriation grant and removal costs 
205,000
12,000
193,000
   Other employment expense
10,000
10,000
0
OFFICE  MANAGEMENT COSTS
95,000
87,000
8,000
    Office lease
38,000
32,000
6,000
    Office running costs               
32,000
32,000
0
    Provision for new/replacement assets
10,000
10,000
0
    Telephone/communications
10,000
9,000
1,000
    Miscellaneous
5,000
4,000
1,000
TOTAL GROSS EXPENDITURE
1,519,870
1,651,900
1,596,000
55,900
Attachment 7b-2
                      COMMISSION FOR THE CONSERVATION OF SOUTHERN BLUEFIN TUNA
                       2006 SPECIAL BUDGET - SRP TAGGING PROGRAM (Surface Fishery)
2006
INCOME 
Contributions from member
529,406
                           
Japan 
191,963
                           
Australia
170,833
                           
Korea
61,876
                             
Fishing Entity of Taiwan
61,876
                             
New Zealand
42,858
                             
Trasfer from General Budget Account
70,000
                             
Proceeds from Special Fund for pilot east coast tagging program
3,600
                               
Carryover from 2005
2,994
                               
    TOTAL GROSS INCOME
606,000
                           
EXPENDITURE
Tag Deployment
606,000
                           
   vessel charter
360,000
                           
   tag application
246,000
                           
TOTAL GROSS EXPENDITURE
606,000
                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AUSTRALIA’S ANNUAL REVIEW OF THE 
SOUTHERN BLUEFIN TUNA FISHERY 
 
by 
 
P.I. Hobsbawn, J.D. Findlay, S. Rowcliffe and A. Bodsworth 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Working Paper CCSBT-EC/0510/SBT Fisheries-Australia 
presented at the Second Meeting of the Extended Commission of the 
Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna 
 
 
 
Taipei, 
October 2005 
Attachment 8-1
Contents 
 
 
Contents .......................................................................................................................................................... 2 
1. 
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................. 3 
2. 
Operational Constraints on Effort......................................................................................................... 4 
Regulatory Measures ................................................................................................................................. 4 
3. 
Catch and Effort...................................................................................................................................... 4 
Discards ..................................................................................................................................................... 7 
4. 
Historical Catch and Effort .................................................................................................................... 7 
5. 
Annual Fleet Size and Distribution...................................................................................................... 10 
South Australia......................................................................................................................................... 10 
Western Australia..................................................................................................................................... 10 
New South Wales..................................................................................................................................... 10 
Tasmania.................................................................................................................................................. 10 
Queensland .............................................................................................................................................. 10 
6. 
Historical Fleet Size and Distribution.................................................................................................. 10 
7. 
Fisheries Monitoring ..............................................................................................................................11 
Catch Disposal Records............................................................................................................................11 
Australian Daily Fishing Log and Farm Transit Log................................................................................11 
Farm Disposal Record ..............................................................................................................................11 
Observer Program.................................................................................................................................... 12 
8. 
Other Factors......................................................................................................................................... 12 
Import/Export Statistics ........................................................................................................................... 12 
Markets .................................................................................................................................................... 12 
Observer Coverage .................................................................................................................................. 12 
Appendix 1: SBT Season Dates 1988–89 to 2004–05 .................................................................................. 13 
 
 
 
2 
1. Introduction 
This report summarises catches and fishing activities in the 2003–04 quota year1 of the Australian Southern 
Bluefin Tuna (Thunnus maccoyii; SBT) Fishery. It also provides preliminary data on the 2004–05 surface 
fishery. 
 
The Australian domestic SBT catches for the 2003 and 2004 calendar years were 5827 t and 5062 t, 
respectively. The 2003 calendar year catch is larger than the previously agreed national allocation to 
Australia of 5265 t because it represents the aggregation of catches from periods in two quota years. The 
2002–03 quota year catch was 5391 t while the catch for the 2003–04 quota year was 5120 t. A catch above 
quota occurred in the 2002–03 year. This overcatch was paid back during the 2003–04 quota year. In August 
2005 there was a prosecution for the illegal take of 5764 kg of SBT in the 2003-04 season. Adding this 
amount to the total reported for that season gives 5126 t, which is still under the agreed national allocation to 
Australia. Note that this amount has not been included in any of the other statistics reported in this paper. 
 
Table 1: Total domestic catch of SBT for calendar years and quota years 
Calendar 
Year 
Catch 
(t) 
Quota 
Year 
Catch (t) 
1990 
4586 
1989–90 
4849 
1991 
4489 
1990–91 
4316 
1992 
5248 
1991–92 
4894 
1993 
5373 
1992–93 
5212 
1994 
4700 
1993–94 
4937 
1995 
4508 
1994–95 
5080 
1996 
5128 
1995–96 
5188 
1997 
5316 
1996–97 
4978 
1998 
4897 
1997–98 
5097 
1999 
5552 
1998–99 
5232 
2000 
5257 
1999–00 
5257 
2001 
4853 
2000–01 
5247 
2002 
4711 
2001–02 
5262 
2003 
5827 
2002–03 
5391 
2004 
5062 
2003–04 
5120 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1 Various time periods, such as ‘calendar years’, ‘fishing seasons’ and ‘quota years’, can be used when describing Australia’s SBT 
fishery. Unless otherwise indicated, we have used quota years in this report, but note that fishing seasons of the various fishery 
components often span quota years. The start and end dates of Australian quota years have varied and are presented in Appendix 1. 
3 
4 
2. Operational Constraints on Effort 
Regulatory Measures 
Domestic operations are managed through individual transferable quotas (ITQs) granted as Statutory Fishing 
Rights (SFRs) under the Southern Bluefin Tuna Management Plan 1995. 
 
The Australian Fisheries Management Authority (AFMA) uses a risk based compliance strategy in the SBT 
purse seine and longline fisheries. This includes targeted compliance operations to check fishing vessels at 
sea, and at landing ports; a comprehensive audit trail from the time SBT are caught to the time they are 
exported, including random audits of fishing companies and export establishments; and then an annual 
review of compliance risks leading to refined strategies for the following season. 
 
Australia has continued to use a combination of area restrictions, minimum quota holdings, fishery observers, 
and mandatory Vessel Monitoring Systems to reduce the incidental catch and mortality of SBT caught in the 
domestic longline fishery. A SBT habitat model incorporating archival tag and observer data with sea surface 
and sub-surface temperatures, is used to predict likely areas of high SBT abundance and hence the location 
of restricted access zones. For the 2004–05 season, the areas with a high probability of SBT interactions 
were subject to 100% observer coverage, and mandatory minimum quota requirements. This has eliminated 
the non quota mortality of longline caught SBT. 
 
To improve compliance and management outcomes for its domestic fishery, and to better meet international 
management obligations, Australia implemented a range of amendments to its SBT Fishery statutory 
management plan on 1 December 2004. These included: 
• 
revised objectives, management measures, and performance criteria; 
• 
incorporation of the Commission's current stock-specific reference point; 
• 
the development of a by-catch action plan and strategies to reduce broader environmental impacts; 
• 
amendments to enhance the accountability of SBT Statutory Fishing Right holders against their 
allocated quota; and, 
• 
daily at sea reporting of SBT taken and transferred into tow cages, provisional deduction of SBT 
quota based on at sea estimates of catch, and daily VMS or manual reporting of catch and tow 
vessel locations. 
 
3. Catch and Effort 
In 2003–04, 95.2% of the Australian catch of SBT was taken by purse seine with the remainder taken by 
longline (Table 2). The Australian catch of SBT for the calendar years 2003 and 2004 is mapped in Figure 1 
and Figure 2 respectively. The nominal catch per unit of effort (CPUE) for the Australian longline fishery for 
the 2003 calendar year is shown in Figure 3, and for the 2004 calendar year in Figure 4. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Australian SBT catch in 2003 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Australian SBT catch in 2004 
 
 
7 
Table 2: Catch of SBT by fishing method in 2002–03 and 2003–04 Seasons 
2002–03 
 
 
Purse seine 
South Australia 
5375 t 
Longline 
Western Australia and New 
South Wales 
17 t 
 
 
 
2003–04 
 
 
Purse seine 
South Australia 
4874 t (small percentage for direct 
export, remainder for farms) 
Longline 
Western Australia, South 
Australia, New South Wales 
and Queensland 
247 t 
 
Insufficient data were available to provide an estimate of the recreational catch in 2004. 
Discards 
During the 2003–04 and 2004–05 seasons, no discarding of SBT was reported in logbooks collected in the 
purse seine fishery in the Great Australian Bight. Note that for the purse seine fishery, mortalities during tow 
operations are recorded in logbooks and included in the count for total number of fish caught. These fish are 
included in the results for total catch by purse seining. There were some escapes, releases and discards of 
SBT noted in observer reports. 
 
In the 2003–04 season, a total of 366 fish were reported on logbooks as discarded in the longline fishery. 
 
In 2004, AFMA observers monitored longline operations in the Eastern Tuna and Billfish Fishery during the 
months and areas in which SBT are most likely to be taken incidentally (i.e. south of 30oS from May to 
September). Observer data showed that 61% of longlined SBT were discarded during the observed 
operations. In contrast, the level of SBT discards recorded in logbooks from other vessels fishing during the 
same period south of 30oS was only 10%. In response to this new information the Australian Fisheries 
Management Authority has implemented tighter access controls and implemented 100% observer coverage 
for the 2005 season. 
 
Over 2004 and 2005, observers monitored longline operations in the Southern and Western Tuna and Billfish 
Fishery. 100% of all SBT hooked were discarded during observed operations but it should be noted that 
levels of effort in this fishery are very low at present (i.e. only one or two vessels are operating). New 
arrangements are being developed for this fishery. 
 
4. Historical Catch and Effort 
Australian catch by gear and State for the quota years 1988–89 to 2003–04 is shown in Table 3. Catch and 
effort (number of search hours and number of vessels) by season, for seasons 1994–95 to 2004–05, in the 
purse seine fishery are show in Table 4. 
 
Table 3: Australian catch by gear and State for quota years 1988–89 to 2003–04 
Quota 
Western Australia 
South Australia 
New South Wales 
 
 
 
 
Tasmania
Large Longliners
Australia Total
Total 
Year 
Albany Esperance
Long- 
Total 
Pole &
Farm
Long-
Total
Pole &
Long-
Total
Troll
Long- 
Total
Aust.
Joint-
Total
Domestic
Domestic
Total
RTMP
All 
Pole 
Pole
line 
 
Purse 
Cages
line
Purse
line
line 
Charter
venture
Surface
Long-
Long-
Gears 
 
 
 
 
 
Seine 
Seine
line
line
1988–89 
 
 
 
 
204
221
0
425 
4872
0
0
4872
0
1
1
2
0
2
0
684
684
5299
1
685
0
5984
1989–90 
 
 
 
 
133
97
0
230 
4199
0
0
4199
0
6
6
14
0
14
0
400
400
4443
6
406
0
4849
1990–91 
 
 
 
175
45
0
220 
2588
0
0
2588
0
15
15
57
0
57
255
881
1136
2865
15
1151
#300
4316 
1991–92 
 
 
 
 
17
0
0
17 
1629
138
14
1781
34
90
124
36
20
56
59
2057
2116
1854
124
2240
800
4894
1992–93 
 
 
 
 
0
0
0
0 
716
722
68
1506
16
238
254
23
44
67
0
2735
2735
1477
350
3085
650
5212
1993–94 
 
 
 
0
0
0
0 
621
1294
55
1970
0
286
286
7
105 
112
0
2299
2299
1922
446
2745
270
4937
1994–95 
 
 
 
0
0
0
0 
908
1954
2
2864
0
157
157
4
109 
113
0
1295
1295
2866
268
1563
650
5080
1995–96 
 
 
 
0
0
0
0 
1447
3362
0
4809
28
89
117
0
262 
262
0
0
0
4837
351
351
0
5188
1996–97 
 
 
 
0
0
0
0 
2000
2498
0
4497
7
229
236
2
242 
244
0
0
0
4507
472
472
0
4978
1997–98 
 
 
 
0
0
^0
0 
916
3488
^0
4403
~0
475
475
!0
219 
219
0
0
0
4433
664
664
0
5097
1998–99 
 
 
 
 
0
0
^0
0
28
4991
^0
5018
~0
97
97
!0
116 
116
0
0
0
5016
216
216
0
5232
1999–00 
 
 
 
 
 
0
0
^0
0
0
5130
13
5143
0
114
114
0
!0
0
0
0
0
5130
127
127
0
5257
2000–01 
 
 
 
 
 
0
0
^0
0
0
5162
6
5168
0
32
32
0
!0
0
0
0
0
5162
38
38
0
5247
2001–02 
 
 
 
 
 
0
0
7
7
0
5234
0
5234
0
*22
*22
0
!0
0
0
0
0
5234
29
29
0
5262
2002–03 
 
 
 
 
0
0
≈0 
0
0
5375
0
5375
0
17
17
0
0
0
0
0
0
5375
17
17
0
5391
2003–04 
 
 
 
0
0
≈0 
0 
‡0
4874
†0
4874
0
*226
*226
0
20
0
0
0
0
4874
247
247
0
5120
 
# Note that a further 700t of Australian quota was ‘frozen’ (not allocated) in 1990–91. 
^ 1997-98 and 1998-99 WA and SA non-farm catches are included in SA pole and purse seine catch, and in 1999–00 and 2000–01 WA longline catch is included in SA longline due to confidentiality guidelines. 
~ 1997-98 to 1998-99 NSW pole and purse seine catches are included in NSW longline catch due to confidentiality guidelines. 
! 1997-98 and 1998-99 Tas troll catches are included in Tas longline, and in 1999–00, 2000-01 and 2001-02 Tas longline catch is included in NSW longline due to confidentiality guidelines. 
* 2001-02 and 2003-04 NSW longline catch also includes QLD longline catch due to confidentiality guidelines. 
≈ 2002-03 and 2003-04 WA longline catch is included in NSW longline due to confidentiality guidelines. 
† 2003-04 SA longline catch is included in NSW longline due to confidentiality guidelines. 
‡ 2003-04 additional SA purse seine catch that did not go into farm cages is included in SA farm cages catch due to confidentiality guidelines. 
 
9 
 
Table 4: Purse seine catch and effort for seasons 1994–95 to 2004–05 
 
Season 
Estimated 
Catch (t) 
Actual 
Catch (t) 
No. 
Boats 
Vessel Search 
Hours 
No. 
Sets 
1o Squares 
Fished 
1994–95 
2179 
2009 
5 
526 
104 
5 
1995–96 
2859 
3442 
6 
631 
89 
11 
1996–97 
3134 
2505 
7 
769 
118 
13 
1997–98 
3916 
3629 
7 
671 
143 
8 
1998–99 
4418 
4991 
7 
972 
129 
3 
1999–00 
4746 
5131 
8 
764 
107 
5 
2000–01 
5100 
5162 
8 
799 
129 
2 
2001–02 
5400 
5234 
7 
1309 
159 
3 
2002–03 
5188 
5375 
7 
1276 
150 
5 
2003–04 
5299 
4874 
6 
1202 
160 
4 
2004–05 
5225 
5215 
8 
1168 
139 
4 
 
Overall the data available on recreational catch of SBT is poor but an initial review revealed high 
year-to-year variability in catches and the locations in which SBT were taken. For the past ten years, 
indicative estimates of annual recreational catches ranged between 3 and 85 tonnes (Table 5) with the highest 
catches occurring around Tasmania (Table 4). These data are indicative estimates only and are based on a 
range of different data sources. Over the next twelve months Australia will work to improve these estimates 
including estimates for the period prior to 1994. 
 
While there are insufficient data at present to quantify the total recreational catches of SBT for 2003–04 and 
2004–05, high spatial catch variability was evident from anecdotal reports. 2003–04 was a good season for 
recreational SBT catches, especially around Pedra Branca, south of Tasmania. 2004–05 was a good season in 
South Australia but poor elsewhere, especially in Tasmania where the annual southern bluefin tuna 
tournament produced very disappointing catches of SBT (i.e. no SBT were caught) . 
 
Table 5:  Indicative estimates of recreational catch (tonnes) by Australian recreational fishers, 1994 to 2004 
(Source: NSW Fisheries). 
 
Year 
Recreational 
Catch (t) 
1994 
16 
1995 
insufficient data 
1996 
insufficient data 
1997 
insufficient data 
1998 
38 
1999 
3 
2000 
10 
2001 
60 
2002 
85 
2003 
insufficient data 
2004 
insufficient data 
 
10 
5. Annual Fleet Size and Distribution 
In 2003–04, a total of 55 commercial fishing vessels landed SBT in Australian waters. 
South Australia 
The one- to five-year-old SBT, which school from late spring to autumn in surface waters of the eastern 
Great Australian Bight, South Australia, were fished by six purse seiners during the 2003–04 quota year, but 
various live bait, pontoon-towing and feeding vessels were also involved. Some older fish were also caught. 
Fishing commenced in early December 2003 and finished in late March 2004. 
Western Australia  
Two longliners caught SBT off the WA coastline in 2003–04. For confidentiality reasons all catches are 
incorporated in the NSW longline catch. Longline fishing in WA commenced in March 2004 and finished in 
December 2004. 
New South Wales 
During 2003–04, 40 domestic longliners participated at some time in the area of the fishery for older 
juveniles and adults in deeper waters off NSW. Longline fishing off NSW commenced in May 2004 and 
finished in September 2004. 
Tasmania 
Nine longliners caught SBT off south-eastern Tasmania between late November 2003 and early January 
2004. 
Queensland 
Four longliners caught SBT off the coast of south-eastern Queensland between July and September 2004. For 
confidentiality reasons, Queensland catches are incorporated in the NSW longline catch. 
 
6. Historical Fleet Size and Distribution 
Troll catches of SBT were reported as early as the 1920s off the east coast of Australia but significant 
commercial fishing for SBT commenced in the early 1950s with the establishment of a pole-and-live-bait 
fishery off New South Wales, South Australia and, later (1970), Western Australia. Purse seine gear overtook 
pole as the predominant method and catches peaked at 21 500 t in 1982. The bulk of this early Australian 
catch of SBT was canned. Following quota reductions in 1983–84, the Western Australian pole fishery for 
very small juveniles closed down and the south-eastern fishery began to target larger juveniles to supply the 
Japanese sashimi market. Surface catches were further reduced between 1989 and 1995 when about half of 
the Australian total allowable catch (TAC) was taken by Australia–Japan joint venture longliners in the 
Australian Fishing Zone (AFZ). The joint venture ceased in late 1995. From 1992 to 1998, domestic 
longliners operating off Tasmania and New South Wales also took around 5–10% of the total Australian 
catch. 
 
11 
In 1990–91 about 20 t of SBT tuna were transferred to fattening cages in Port Lincoln, South Australia, to 
enhance their value. Utilisation of the Australian SBT TAC in ‘farming’ operations increased from 3% of the 
TAC in 1991–92 to 98% in 1999–00 and it has remained at similar high levels since. 
 
Following declaration of the Australian Fishing Zone (AFZ) in 1979, Japanese longliners fished under a 
range of bilateral conditions, real time monitoring program and joint-venture arrangements until 1997 when 
Japanese longliners were excluded from all AFZ fishing operations following failure to reach agreement on 
global TAC within the CCSBT. Caton and Ward (1996) provide copies of annual subsidiary agreements for 
the operations of bilateral-licensed longliners in the AFZ from 1979–80 to 1994–95. 
 
7. Fisheries Monitoring 
There are a series of logbooks and associated catch records that are required by law to be completed by 
fishers and fish receivers and sent to AFMA for the purposes of monitoring, compliance and research. The 
type of form used is dependent on the type of method used to catch SBT in the fishery. All of the data 
provided from Logbooks and Catch Disposal Records must be supplied to AFMA within specified time 
periods specific to each record. 
Catch Disposal Records 
Catch disposal records for SBT are for recording SBT taken by fishers for the purposes other than farming 
and are signed by the fishing concession holder and the first receiver immediately after unloading the catch. 
Catch disposal records provide a means to verify logbook data. 
Australian Daily Fishing Log and Farm Transit Log 
A logbook form is required to be completed by fishers when using pelagic longlining or when fishing with 
minor line methods. The Australian Pelagic Longline Daily Fishing Log is required to be completed for 
longline fishing. In the purse seine fishery the Master of the catcher vessel (with quota assigned) is required 
to complete the Australian Purse Seine and Pole Daily Fishing Log – for farmed SBT only. A specific permit 
called the Farm Transit Log is completed by the holder of the SBT carrier boat permit or representative, and 
provided to the monitoring company which undertakes the fish count when fish are transferred from tow 
cages to farm cages. 
Farm Disposal Record 
A specific process has been designed to obtain data to allow for research and monitoring from farming 
operations. An independent company is contracted annually by AFMA to monitor the farming operations. All 
mortalities that occur during the capture and towing operations must be recorded on the appropriate form and 
must be available for inspection if requested by an AFMA officer. 
 
When SBT are transferred from tow cages to the fish farms, a video record must be carried out by the AFMA 
contracted monitoring company. The video recording is then used to undertake a count of the fish that are 
12 
transferred into the fish farm. This count of captured fish will be multiplied by the average fish weight 
(derived from a 40 fish sample) and decremented from quota using the Farm Disposal Record. AFMA 
Compliance Officers observed at sea operations during both the 2003–04 and the 2004–05 seasons. 
Observer Program 
Observer programmes for the purse seine fishery have been in place since the 2002–03 season, and for the 
longline fishery (south-eastern part of the Eastern Tuna and Billfish Fishery) since the middle of 2002.  
 
The monitoring arrangements in the SBT fishery continue to be reviewed and refined in order to improve 
monitoring and compliance. To minimise the risk of non-quota take of SBT by longliners off New South 
Wales, since 2000, access to the waters through which SBT migrate has been restricted to vessels holding 
SBT quota. 
 
8. Other Factors 
Import/Export Statistics 
The Trade Information Scheme that records all exported Australian fish has been implemented and refined.  
A Trade Information Scheme (TIS) form is completed by an authorised signatory from the export-registered 
establishment that is the last to handle the consignment before the product leaves Australia and validated by a 
Government officer. The form is used for both farmed and non-farmed SBT. This program provides a 
complete record of SBT exports that can be compared with the Japanese Import Statistics. 
Markets 
In the 2003–04, in order of 30 t of SBT is retained for the domestic market; approximately 80 t was exported 
to the USA; and the remainder of the Australian catch was exported to Japan. 
Observer Coverage 
The purse seine observer programme for the 2004–05 Australian SBT fishing season monitored fishing and 
tow operations between 33 and 34oS and 132 and 133oE in January and February 2005. One Australian and 
one American observer monitored 15 purse seine sets representing 11% of the total sets in which fish were 
taken in that season. 
 
The 2004 observer programme for the Eastern Tuna and Billfish Fishery south of 30ºS commenced in May 
and concluded in September, the months in which SBT are usually caught. In those months 11 observers 
monitored 183 thousand hooks of a season total of 1.57 million (May-Sept, south of 30oS), representing 
11.7% observer coverage of longline effort in this fishery. 
 
In the Southern and Western Tuna and Billfish Fishery, eight voyages and 59 sets out of a season total of 
1321 were observed. Observer coverage of hook sets for the whole season was 4.5% in this fishery. 
13 
Appendix 1: SBT Season Dates 1988–89 to 2004–05 
 
Quota Year 
Start Date 
End Date 
1988–89 
1 October 1988 
30 September 1989 
1989–90 
1 October 1989 
30 September 1990 
1990–91 
1 October 1990 
30 September 1991 
1991–92 
1 October 1991 
31 October 1992 
1992–93 
1 November 1992 
31 October 1993 
1993–94 
1 November 1993 
31 October 1994 
1994–95 
1 November 1994 
15 December 1995 
1995–96 
16 December 1995 
15 December 1996 
1996–97 
16 December 1996 
30 November 1997 
1997–98 
1 December 1997 
30 November 1998 
1998–99 
1 December 1998 
30 November 1999 
1999–00 
1 December 1999 
30 November 2000 
2000–01 
1 December 2000 
30 November 2001 
2001–02 
1 December 2001 
30 November 2002 
2002–03 
1 December 2002 
30 November 2003 
2003–04 
1 December 2003 
30 November 2004 
2004–05 
1 December 2004 
30 November 2005 
 
Review of Taiwan’s SBT Fishery of 2003/2004 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Taiwan has traditionally been fishing for southern bluefin tuna (SBT) since 1970s. The 
SBT was caught partly by seasonal target fishery and partly by albacore/bigeye fisheries 
as a by-catch. Seasonal target fishery was conducted mainly by longliners equipped with 
super cold freezers, fishing in two seasons, i.e. one from June to September and the other 
from October to February of the following year, in the waters around 30°S-35°S. 
However, no year-round target fishing has yet been conducted. The total annual catch in 
2004 was preliminarily estimated to be 1,298 mt, an increase of 170 mt compared to the 
previous year 2003. The annual catch in 2004 was outreached to 1,140 mt, the catch limit 
allocated by CCSBT. Therefore, the outreaching amount of over catch 158 mt will be 
deducted from the quota in 2005. 
 
2. OPERATIONAL CONSTRAINTS ON EFFORT 
 
Regulatory Measures 
Taiwan has become a member of the Extended Commission of CCSBT in 2002, and 
agreed to its national catch limit of 1,140 mt. Two groups of fishing vessels for seasonal 
target fishery and by-catch on SBT are differentiated and each of those authorized vessel 
is allocated with individual quota. Each vessel is required to register with the Taiwan 
Tuna Association either for target or by-catch fishery. Besides, those vessels have to be 
reviewed and approved by the government before catching SBT. About 99% of the 
annual catch was allocated to the seasonal target vessels, while the remaining 1% to the 
by-catch vessels in 2004. 
 
In order to collect SBT catch information in a timely basis and to manage the total SBT 
catch not exceeding the catch limit, every vessel that catches SBT has been required to 
submit weekly report on it’s catches of SBT in weight and fishing location to the fisheries 
authorities since 1996. This system has been refined in 2002 to obtain more accurate 
catch information including the length measurement of each fish caught. Taiwan has 
undertaken issuing of SBT Statistical Document for exportation of SBT from June 2000 
to be in line with the requirement of Trade Information Scheme (TIS). All vessels fishing 
for SBT have also been required to be equipped with Vessel Monitoring System’s (VMS) 
equipment for transmitting the vessel location in real time to the monitoring center since 
2002. Fishing in spawning area of SBT suggested by Scientific Committee is prohibited 
and document of TIS will not be issued to any catch from this area to protect the 
spawning stock. 
 
3. CATCH AND EFFORT 
 
In the 2004 fishing season, SBT catch limit of Taiwan maintained at 1,140 mt, and the 
actual catch was 1,298 mt caught by 107 vessels including seasonal target and by-catch 
fishery. About 91% of the Taiwanese SBT catch was caught in the southern and central 
Indian Ocean, 9% was caught in the southern and western Indian Ocean extending to the 
Attachment 8-2
eastern boundary of the Atlantic Ocean. There were 76 vessels in total approved as 
seasonal target or by-catch fishery in 2005. 
 
4. HISTORICAL CATCH AND EFFORT 
 
In early 1980s, annual catch of SBT was relatively small as less than 250 mt. With 
continuously expanding of tuna long-line fleet and fishing grounds, increase in annual 
catches was prominent afterwards. Between 1989 and 1992, there was significant 
increase of SBT annual catch exceeding 1,100 mt, of which drift net fishery accounted 
for about 1/4 of the catches. With the prohibition of drift net fishery on the high seas 
since 1993 for compliance with the United Nations Gillnet Moratorium, the annual catch 
of SBT decreased to a stable level fluctuating between 800 and 1,600 mt during the last 
decade (Table 1). The discard amount of SBT in 2004 was preliminarily estimated from 
weekly reports to be 2 mt. Since 2004, the discard information was added in logbook, the 
preliminarily discard amount need to be crosschecked with the logbooks which will be 
recovered in 2005.  
 
5. ANNUAL FLEET SIZE AND DISTRIBUTION 
 
In 2004, 107 longline vessels were approved for catching SBT, of which most vessels 
operated in the Indian Ocean. Their fishing grounds were mainly in the waters of 20°S - 
40°S, seasonally distributed in the southern and central Indian Ocean from June to 
September, and in the southern and western Indian Ocean extending to the eastern 
boundary of the Atlantic Ocean from October to February of the following year. 
 
6. HISTORICAL FLEET SIZE AND DISTRIBUTION 
 
SBT was caught only by longline fishery after 1992 in the three oceans, but mainly in the 
Indian Ocean. According to the weekly reports from the fishing vessels and trader’s 
information, about 140 Taiwanese deep-sea longliners landed SBT each year during 
1998-2002, and most of them operated in the Indian Ocean. 
 
7. FISHERIES MONITORING 
 
Intensive efforts have been continuously exerted for better understanding and monitoring 
the fishery through the following measures: 
 
1. The weekly report for SBT catch is required through Taiwan Tuna Association to 
submit to Fishery Agency. Provision of daily records, including catch, fishing 
location and discards in the weekly report has been required while applying for SBT 
statistical document since 2002. 
2. From April 2002, it is mandatory for the vessels that catch SBT shall be equipped 
with VMS’s equipment in order to monitor location of the vessels. 
3. The experimental scientific observer program has been launched since 2001. The 
coverage was 4% by catch in number in 2004. 
4. TIS program has been implemented to collect more updated and detailed catch 
information. While applying for TIS document, the applicant is required to submit the 
transshipment document issued by the cargo carriers. After unloading catch in Japan, 
the applicant is required to submit to Fisheries Agency the unloading documents 
issued by the Japanese Customs for further verification of catch statistics. 
 
8. OTHER FACTORS 
 
Markets 
Currently, all SBT caught by Taiwanese vessels are exported to Japan for sashimi market. 
Domestic consumption is negligible.                                                          
Table 1. Annual SBT catches by Taiwanese deep-sea longline and drift net fisheries 
during 1971-2004. (Data of 2004 is preliminary.) 
 
Unit: metric ton 
Year 
Deep Sea Longline
Drift Net 
Total 
1971 
30 
 
30 
1972 
70 
 
70 
1973 
90 
 
90 
1974 
100 
 
100 
1975 
15 
 
15 
1976 
15 
 
15 
1977 
5 
 
5 
1978 
80 
 
80 
1979 
53 
 
53 
1980 
64 
 
64 
1981 
92 
 
92 
1982 
171 
11 
182 
1983 
149 
12 
161 
1984 
244 
0 
244 
1985 
174 
67 
241 
1986 
433 
81 
514 
1987 
623 
87 
710 
1988 
622 
234 
856 
1989 
1,076 
319 
1,395 
1990 
872 
305 
1,177 
1991 
1,353 
107 
1,460 
1992 
1,219 
3 
1,222 
1993 
958 
 
958 
1994 
1,020 
 
1,020 
1995 
1,431 
 
1,431 
1996 
1,467 
 
1,467 
1997 
872 
 
872 
1998 
1,446 
 
1,446 
1999 
1,513 
 
1,513 
2000 
1,448 
 
1,448 
2001 
1,580 
 
1,580 
2002 
1,137 
 
1,137 
2003 
1,128 
 
1,128 
2004* 
1,298 
 
1,298 
 
 
 
 
 
Review of Japanese SBT Fisheries in the 2004 Fishing Season 
 
1.  Introduction 
Japanese far-seas tuna longline fisheries industry has suffered a severe economic situation 
due to the fall in tuna price caused by oversupply of tuna, most of which are imported 
from all over the world. To make the situation worse, the industry has been severely 
damaged by rise in oil price.  
 
2. Operational Constrains on Effort 
Fishing operations in the 2004 fishing season have been started with 6,007 MT as a 
substantial national allocation, which is subtracted 127 MT (the figure was overcaught in 
2002) and added 69 MT (the figure was unused in 2003) from 6,065 MT as agreed at the 
2003 CCSBT Commission. 
The Japanese fishing industry has voluntary set starting days for three sub-fishing areas 
(high seas area off Tasmania/Sydney, off Cape Town and in Southern Indian Ocean) and 
limited the total number of vessels for each sub-fishing area. 
To monitor Japanese tuna vessels, GOJ dispatched its fishing patrol vessels for the three 
sub-fishing areas before and after the areas were closed. 
Landing inspection was randomly conducted by landing inspectors of Fisheries Agency to 
check whether or not reported SBT catch was exactly same as landed SBT. No violation 
was found in the year 2004. 
 
3. Catch and Effort  
In the 2004 fishing season, total SBT caught by Japanese tuna vessels was 5,982 MT.  
The fishing operations for the three sub-fishing grounds on high seas were closed on 31 
July of 2004 with the catch of 1,134 MT by 46 vessels off Tasmania/Sydney, closed on 9 
August with the catch of 3,174 MT by 123 vessels off Cape Town and closed on 23 
December of 2004 with the catch of 1,667 MT in Southern Indian Ocean, respectively.  7 
MT of SBT was reported as bycatch.  
No discards by Japanese tuna vessels were reported.  No SBT catch by recreational 
fishing was reported. All SBT caught by Japanese tuna vessels were presumed to be 
consumed domestically. 
 
4. Historical Catch and Effort 
 (1) In the 1999 fishing season, GOJ originally took the same voluntary measures as for the 
1998 fishing season, in the absence of a decision on TAC by the Commission.  However, 
following the prescription of provisional measures by ITLOS concerning the 
Attachment 8-3
 
 
experimental fishing conducted by Japan, the actual catch for the 1999 season was 5,354 
MT reduced by 711 MT. 
(2) In the 2000 fishing season, GOJ set the voluntary catch limit as 4,578MT, 1,487MT 
less than 6,065MT, which was the national allocation to Japan agreed in 1997. However, 
since the provisional measures prescribed by ITLOS was revoked in August 2000, the 
voluntary catch limit was changed to 6,065MT in September 2000. The actual catch in 
the 2000 season was 6,027MT. 
(3) In the 2001 fishing season, fishing operations were started with a tentative catch limit of 
6,065MT, and GOJ set the voluntary catch limit of 6,421MT after the consultation with 
the relevant Members. The actual catch in the 2001 season was 6,647MT. 
(4) In the 2002 fishing season, fishing operations were started with a tentative catch limit of 
6,065MT, and the actual catch was 6,192MT. 
(5) In the 2003 fishing season, GOJ set the voluntary catch limit as 5,839 MT, which were 
subtracted 226 MT from 6,065MT, and the actual catch was 5,770 MT. 
  
5. Annual Fleet Size and Distribution  
The number of fishing vessels selected for targeting SBT in the 2004 fishing season was 
236.  The number of vessels on the high seas off Tasmania/Sydney was 46, the number of 
vessels on the high seas off Cape Town was 123, and the number of vessels in Southern 
Indian Ocean was 67 respectively. 
 
6. Historical Fleet Size and Distribution  
(1) In the 1999 fishing season, 227 fishing vessels (30 vessels less than the 1998 fishing 
seasons) operated, since Japan cut the number of far-seas tuna longliners following the 
Plan of Action agreed by FAO. 
(2) In the 2000 fishing season, the number of vessels for SBT was reduced to 172 in 
accordance with the reduction of the catch limit based on the provisional measures 
prescribed by ITLOS. However, since the provisional measures were revoked, 27 vessels 
were added to the original, and, consequently 199 vessels operated for SBT based on the 
increase of the catch limit in September. 
(3) In the 2001, 2002 and 2003 fishing season, the number of vessels for SBT was 227, 224 
and 221 respectively. 
 
 
7. Fisheries Monitoring 
(1) GOJ issued a notification to the industry that every vessel targeting SBT must submit 
catch and effort report to GOJ every 10 days for the management of the catch limit. 
(2) GOJ took necessary measures to control and monitor the fishery, which include 
dispatching enforcement vessels to the fishing areas, dispatching scientific observers 
 
 
onboard randomly selected from SBT operating vessels, and requesting to install VMS 
for all the SBT targeting vessels and to report theirs positions to GOJ on daily basis. 
(3) In the 2004 fishing season, 2 enforcement vessels were dispatched to the SBT fishing 
grounds. 
(4) In the 2004 fishing season, 16 scientific observers were dispatched, and 14 observers 
conducted research onboard.  2 observers could not embark on fishing vessels because 
schedule was unfit between reefer and fishing vessels and consequently they failed to 
conduct research.  Observer coverage of Japanese SBT tuna vessels were: 8.3% in the 
number of vessels, 5.0 % in the number of hooks used and 4.0% in the number of SBT 
caught. 
 
8. Others factors 
  Import/Export Statistics 
The amount of imported SBT in 2004 was 11,373 MT (product weight), more than 3,000 
MT compared with the year 2003.  Most of SBT imported to Japan was from CCSBT 
members (1: Australia, 2: Taiwan, 3: Republic of Korea, 4: New Zealand).  In particular, 
SBT imported from Australia was 9,749 MT, which accounted for 85.7% of the total SBT 
imported to Japan. 
Appendix 1
Trend in catch and fishing effort in Japanese SBT fisheries
vessels selected for targeting SBT
others
total
high seas off
high seas off
high seas in
Tasmania/Sydney
Cape Town
Southern Indian Ocean
allocation of catch
by area
6,065mt
1,720mt
3,000mt
1,345mt
-
actual catch
5,354mt
1,539mt
2,513mt
1,113mt
189mt
numbers of vessels
227vessels
69vessels
99vessels
59vessels
-
from April 15 to May 31
from May 1
from September 1
from March 1
 from July 1 to August 10
to August 10
 to December 1
to February 29
allocation of catch
original
4,578mt
1,298mt
2,265mt
1,015mt
-
by area (**1)
revised
6,065mt
1,298mt
2,265mt
2,502mt
-
actual catch
6,027mt
1,260mt
2,235mt
2,400mt
132mt
numbers of vessels
original
172vessels
52vessels
75vessels
45vessels
-
(**2)
revised
199vessels
52vessels
75vessels
72vessels
-
from April 15
from May 1
from September 1
from March 1
to August 1
 to August 1
 to December 27
to February 28
allocation of catch 
original
6,065mt
1,720mt
3,000mt
1,345mt
-
by area  (**3)
revised
6,421mt
1,850mt
3,226mt
1,345mt
-
actual catch
6,647mt
1,816mt
3,212mt
1,594mt
25mt
numbers of vessels
227vessels
69vessels
99vessels
59vessels
-
from April 15
from May 1
from September 1
from March 1
to July 16
 to August 2
 to November 29
to February 28
6,065mt
1,720mt
3,000mt
1,345mt
-
actual catch
6,192mt
1,960mt
3,312mt
854mt
66mt
numbers of vessels
224vessels
69vessels
96vessels
59vessels
-
from April 15
from May 1
from September 1
from March 1
to July 19
 to July 5
 to November 30
to February 28
allocation of catch by area
5,839mt
1,392mt
3,056mt
1,391mt
actual catch
5,770mt
1,556mt
2,884mt
1,074mt
257mt
numbers of vessels
221vessels
53vessels
105vessels
63vessels
-
from April 15
from May 1
from September 1
from March 1
 to July 30
to July 8
to Dec 16
to February 29
allocation of catch by area
6,007mt
1,191mt
3,118mt
1,698mt
actual catch
5,982mt
1,134mt
3,174mt
1,667mt
7mt
numbers of vessels
236vessels
46vessels
123vessels
67vessels
-
from April 15
from May 1
from September 1
from March 1
 to July 31
to August 9
to Dec 23
to February 28
Note: Japanese Fishing season of SBT is from March to February.
(**1) Original allocation of catch was revised because of the provisional measures prescribed by ITOLS were revoked by the arbitral tribunal.
(**2) Original numbers of vessels were revised because of the provisional measures prescribed by ITOLS were revoked by the arbitral tribunal.
(**3) Original allocation of catch was revised after consultations with the relevant members
-
-
fishing period
fishing period
fishing period
-
fishing period
-
fishing period
-
allocation of catch by area
by-catch only
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
fishing period
-
Appendix 2
SBT Import Statistics of Japan
Japanese Import of SBT by Country/Area (Fresh・Chilled and Frozen)
( unit: kg )
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
from January
from January
from January
from January
from January
from January
from January
from January
from January
from January
to December
to December
to December
to December
to December
to December
to December
to December
to December
to December
Australia
3,272,990
3,195,903
6,125,027
6,256,201
6,987,421
7,831,621
8,185,820
8,237,206
6,368,352
9,748,627
Taiwan
1,276,474
1,396,915
516,055
1,481,378
1,611,250
1,357,906
1,478,751
1,005,656
991,599
1,089,597
Korea
75,836
562,573
671,497
1,649,851
1,056,953
785,426
932,889
954,285
491,446
138,277
New Zealand
202,636
128,249
88,640
120,176
213,576
212,316
199,813
240,338
260,731
228,905
Indonesia
207,758
317,687
368,634
282,265
310,552
127,012
77,528
181,322
48,825
23,899
Seychel
1,129
32,435
176,740
Philippines
182
4,415
69,170
15,041
16,197
54,828
44,678
84,897
China *
9,183
373
3,738
3,172
15,173
35,004
1,508
South Africa
4,201
Honduras
146,574
179,918
55,286
144,138
244,423
17,048
Singapore
1,968
43,835
17,199
18,936
21,827
3,423
Guam
680
454
3,673
2,429
1,900
Fiji
445
396
181
972
526
EQ Guinea
130,846
32,258
446
Palau
569
690
1,073
166
Thailand
333
376
645
125
Belize
3,380
9,534
278
91,849
39,580
Combodia
17,301
4,374
Malaysia
271
836
Greece
502
Uruguay
342
102
1,028
186
Tonga
138
162
USA
1,320
2,062
Panama
212,632
Croatia
729
9,9801
F.S of Micronesia
195
Maldives
163
New Caledonia
119
Portugal
93
Vanuatu
17,855
France
2,995
Chile
334
Cook Islands
140
Spain
11,061
Tunisia
124
47,1441
Toral
5,210,229
5,857,804
8,059,491
10,203,543
10,599,691
10,356,694
10,926,605
10,865,548
8,244,836
11,372,834
Source: Japan Trade Statistics, Ministry of Finance
1 These figures are believed to be northern bluefin tuna so they should not be considered part of the global SBT catch.
 
 
Review of New Zealand SBT Fisheries 
 
 
 
1.  Introduction 
Since the start of the domestic southern bluefin tuna (SBT) fishery handline, trolling and longline 
have been used to target SBT in the EEZ. In recent years nearly all of the SBT catch has been by 
surface longline with occasional small catches by trolling and a small bycatch in the mid-water 
trawl fishery for hoki. The domestic fishery is composed of a wide range of vessel types including 
many small owner-operated boats, a few large low temperature longliners purchased overseas and 
4–5 large low temperature Japanese operated distant water longliners chartered by a New Zealand 
company. Both the chartered vessels and the New Zealand owner-operated vessels fish 
competitively against New Zealand’s SBT catch allocation. 
 
New Zealand’s fishing year starts 1 October and finishes 30 September of the following year. 
SBT is seasonally present from March/April to August-September. Fishing takes place in two 
areas, off the east coast of the North Island north of 42 S and off the west coast of the South 
Island south of 42 S. The distribution of SBT catches by month and latitude in 2003/04 is shown 
in Figure 1. Figure 1 indicates that the season was somewhat earlier and larger catches were taken 
off the west coast than off the east coast in 2003/04.  
 
In 2003/04 the New Zealand southern bluefin tuna season was closed 12 July 2004 (midnight) in 
anticipation of realising the national catch limit. Only 397 tonnes was taken by the time the 
season closed. 
 
2.  Operational Constraints on Effort 
Voluntary measures 
Since 1994 the New Zealand fishing industry has implemented voluntary measures with respect to 
longline fishing that are detailed in a “Code of Practice”. Specific measures include gear 
specifications, environmental standards, operational practices and closed areas. The intent of the 
measures is to minimize: 
• 
bycatch (eg of seabirds and marine mammals); 
• 
catch of SBT smaller than 20 kg; 
• 
impacts on other domestic tuna fisheries, and 
• 
gear conflict among SBT longline vessels. 
Other voluntary measures that are used but not part of the “Code of Practice” include catch limits 
by area, changing areas when bird bycatch reaches a specific level, using multiple “tori” lines and 
longer lines than specified in regulations, night-setting, and the use of pneumatic “bird-scaring” 
cannons. 
 
Regulatory measures 
New Zealand continues to impose the previously agreed national catch limit of 420 t (whole 
weight). This catch limit has been a competitive limit among all license holders. Regulations 
specified the annual catch limit and made it an offence to take SBT once the catch limit had been 
reached. The catch limit applied within and outside New Zealand fisheries waters for the “fishing 
year” which extends from 1 October to 30 September. In the few years when the catch limit had 
been exceeded, it was reduced in the following year by an equivalent amount. 
 
Until midway through the 2000/01 fishing season the SBT quota has applied to the catch of both 
southern bluefin tuna (Thunnus maccoyii) and Pacific bluefin tunas (formerly Thunnus thynnus, 
now recognized as Thunnus orientalis). The quota restriction on Pacific bluefin tuna was removed 
Attachment 8-4
 
2
late in the 2000/01 SBT season when Pacific bluefin tuna was identified as a separate species and 
it was demonstrated that Pacific bluefin could be readily distinguished from SBT in catches based 
on morphological characteristics and DNA analysis. SBT landings reported prior to June 2001 
distinguished between northern and southern bluefin despite the fact the catches of both were 
counted against the SBT quota. Catches reported as northern bluefin were most likely Pacific 
bluefin. The quota restriction on northern bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus) was removed in 2002. 
 
Southern bluefin tuna was introduced into the New Zealand Quota Management System (QMS) 
effective 1 October 2004. The combination of a small national allocation and the large number of 
longline vessels operating in the EEZ had resulted in the traditional New Zealand SBT fishery 
becoming an “Olympic” fishery. The entry of SBT into the QMS provides a framework where 
recognised SBT quota holders can maximise the economic efficiency of their longline operations. 
New Zealand’s allocation applies to all fishing and fishing related mortality caused by New 
Zealand nationals and for the 2004/05 fishing year has been allocated as follows: 
 
Tonnes
(whole weight) 
Recreational take 
 
   4 
Customary take 
 
   1 
Other fisheries related sources of mortality 
 
   2 
Total allowable commercial catch 
 
413 
Total 
 
420 
 
NZ anticipates a number of improvements in the management of its southern bluefin tuna fishery 
as a result of a move to QMS management. Three forms of catch reporting are required (catch, 
effort and landing, catch against quota and reports by receivers of fish) to improve the monitoring 
of catches.  Significant financial penalties will apply to fishers who do not cover catch of SBT 
with quota thereby limiting the potential for over catch. Further, a rationalisation of fishing effort 
for SBT is anticipated in conjunction with an extension of the fishing season to focus on periods 
when SBT are in the best possible condition for capture. Pacific bluefin tuna were also introduced 
into the QMS on 1 October 2004 with a total allowable commercial catch of 116 t. 
 
3.  Historical Catch and Effort 
Table 1 gives the total estimated SBT catch by gear type since 1999 and shows that the New 
Zealand SBT fishery, initially a handline and troll fishery, has essentially become a longline 
fishery. With the advent of domestic longline fishing (starting in 1990) longline effort has almost 
completely replaced fishing effort by trolling and handline. However, small amounts of SBT 
continue to be caught by trolling, with a small SBT bycatch in the mid-water trawl fishery (1.1 to 
5.8 t per year). Total SBT catches are summarised by calendar year and fishing year (1 October to 
30 September) in Table 2.  
 
The charter fleet primarily operates off the west coast of the South Island while smaller domestic 
owned and operated vessels primarily operate off the east coast of the North Island. The fishing 
season for SBT is essentially the same for both areas and begins in March/April and finishes when 
the quota is reached usually in June/July. Figure 2 shows the effort trend (in thousands of hooks) 
for the longline fishery from 1999 to 2004 for the two primary fishing areas for SBT target sets.  
Longline effort in the northeast area (mostly domestic owned and operated vessels) dramatically 
increasing since 1999, declined by about 35% in 2004. In contrast SBT fishing effort in the 
southwest area (chiefly by the charter fleet) has been relatively constant but increased by nearly 
the same amount in 2004. Total longline effort (charter and domestic combined) targeting SBT 
between 1999 and 2003 increased from 1.9 to 3.5 million hooks targeting SBT before declining 
slightly (about 8% overall) in 2004. Despite generally increasing longline effort since 1999, 
CPUE has declined in the core fishing areas and months by about 50%.  
 
 
3
4.  Annual Fleet Size and Distribution 
Longline fishing targeting SBT primarily occurs off the west coast of the South Island south of 
42º S and along the east coast of the North Island north of 42º S. SBT also comprises a bycatch in 
the bigeye target fishery in the Bay of Plenty. Figure 3 shows the position of all longline sets 
targeting SBT in 2003/04 (charter and owner-operator vessels combined). In 2003/04 longline 
fishing was generally more broadly spread than in most years with target fishing spread south 
along the Wairarapa coast, north into the Bay of Plenty, and the North Taranaki Bight off the west 
coast of the North Island. 
 
The total number of longliners fishing in 2004 was 82 vessels, most of which were small 
longliners (< 50 GRT). Figure 4 shows the catch of SBT by vessel size. The five large longliners 
caught nearly half of the total SBT catch in 2004 with the remaining domestic owned and 
operated vessels catching the remainder. 
 
5.  Historical Fleet Size and Distribution 
The New Zealand SBT fishery began off the west coast of the South Island as a winter small boat 
handline and troll fishery in the early 1980s. Most fishing by these vessels was in July and August. 
Since 1990, however, these methods have comprised only a minor component of the fishery as the 
SBT quota has generally been caught by longline vessels by the time the handline fishery started. 
During the 1980s to mid-1990s most longlining was conducted by foreign licensed longliners 
from Japan. However, declining catch rates, shortened seasons of availability and reports of 
increased operating costs in the EEZ resulted in the foreign licensed fleet ceasing operations in 
1995. Domestic longlining began in 1991 and steadily increased to over 150 vessels in 2002 
before declining again in 2003 (132 vessels) and again in 2004 (82 vessels).  
 
6. Fisheries Monitoring 
Observer coverage 
Observer coverage has been nearly 100% in the charter fleet for several years. However, the small 
size of domestic owned and operated vessels and short trips has made it difficult for the Ministry 
of Fisheries (MFish) to realise the 10% target for observer coverage in this fleet. Observer 
deployments during the 2003/04 fishing year resulted in 20% of all longline hooks targeting SBT 
being observed (97% of hooks in the Charter fleet and 6% of hooks on domestic owner-operator 
vessels). This level of observer coverage resulted in 100% of the charter catch and 16% of the 
domestic catch (in number) being observed. Realignment of MFish observer allocation is 
expected to result in continued improvements in coverage of domestic owned and operated 
longline vessels. Observer coverage on vessels using handline or trolling is not done because the 
contribution of these methods to the total catch is negligible.  
RTMP coverage 
To date MFish has operated an in-season catch monitoring system for SBT. This system required 
that on-shore processing companies and freezer vessels (including all of the chartered fleet) report 
their catch by e-mail or fax during the season to MFish. Weekly reporting was required once 25% 
of the catch allocation was reached and daily reporting required when 50% of the catch allocation 
had been reached. Reports were collated and analysed by MFish with the season being closed as 
close as possible to reaching our national allocation. All SBT permit holders were then notified 
that the season was closed and that it would be an offence to take southern bluefin tuna for the 
remainder of the fishing year.  
 
From 1 October 2004 the catch monitoring and catch balancing systems in place for all other NZ 
quota species will apply to southern bluefin tuna. All fishers are required to furnish monthly 
returns of catch and these are then matched to individual holdings of quota entitlement.  Financial 
penalties will apply to fishers (on a monthly basis) who catch southern bluefin tuna other than 
under the authority of quota. Fishers have the opportunity to reconcile their catch and quota 
entitlements up until the end of the fishing year and if they do not do so the financial penalties 
 
4
increase. The total fishery catches will be assessed annually and any adjustment made to future 
years to balance the catch from the fishery and the NZ national allocation as required. 
 
Biological information 
Observers from the MFish Scientific Observer Programme are responsible for collecting 
biological data on SBT and bycatch data for catch characterisation. In 2003/04, 2007 SBT were 
measured for length (out of 2063 observed), otoliths were collected from 1140 SBT and observers 
recovered 5 tags (3 CSIRO dart tags, 1 CSIRO archival tag, and 1 CCSBT dart tag). In addition, 
observers tagged six SBT with Mk9 archival tags. Tag recovery data was provided to each 
tagging agency. Otoliths are stored at NIWA and this year nearly 200 SBT otoliths collected in 
2001 through 2004 were aged. Length, weight (both processed and whole weights) and sex are 
recorded regularly for SBT and all major fish bycatch species.  
 
7. Other Factors 
Import/export statistics 
Statistics on the export of SBT are compiled by Customs and summarized by the Department of 
Statistics. Export statistics are further summarized by the New Zealand Seafood Industry Council 
and maintained as a database for economic evaluations of New Zealand fisheries. 
Markets 
The only market for SBT caught in the EEZ is the Japanese sashimi market and domestic 
consumption is negligible. 
Mitigation 
New Zealand regulations specify that all tuna longline vessels shall use seabird-scaring devices 
(“tori-lines”). The minimum standard for “tori lines” is the same as initially specified by 
CCAMLR. The domestic fishing industry has a voluntary code of practice advocating night 
setting for all tuna longlining and for the large tuna longline vessels a limit on total incidental 
mortality of “at risk” seabirds has been set. New Zealand is currently implementing an approved 
National Plan of Action for Seabirds in response to the FAO International Plan of Action for 
Seabirds. 
Recreational and Customary Catches of SBT 
Recreational fishing for SBT in New Zealand waters is limited. There are records of recreational 
catch from both the North and South Islands. There are no estimates of SBT catches by Maori 
non-commercial fishing. However, a nominal allowance is made that is expected to be sufficient 
to cover both recreational and customary catches within New Zealand’s national allocation. 
 
Resolution on IUU fishing and establishment of CCSBT Vessel record 
New Zealand has provided a list of authorised vessels to the CCSBT Secretariat and has put in 
place routine systems to update the record as required.  The list includes all New Zealand flagged 
and registered fishing vessels all of which are technically authorised to fish for southern bluefin 
tuna in New Zealand fisheries waters.  Any catch of southern bluefin tuna is recorded and 
monitored by routine systems established as part of the New Zealand Quota Management System 
and New Zealand has no information to suggest that any of its registered fishing vessels have an 
involvement in IUU fishing.  Procedures have been put in place to ensure that foreign owned 
vessels fishing under charter to New Zealand companies may only fish for southern bluefin tuna if 
they are from a member state of the Extended CCSBT.  Individual assessments of the compliance 
history of foreign owned vessels are required prior to the approval of their registration as New 
Zealand fishing vessels.  
  
Prepared by: Shelton Harley, Talbot Murray1, Terese Kendrick2 and Arthur Hore3 
                                                 
1 Ministry of Fisheries, Wellington, NZ 
2 Trophia Ltd., Kaikoura, NZ 
3 Ministry of Fisheries, Auckland, NZ 
 
5
 
Table 1.  The annual southern bluefin tuna catch (tonnes whole weight) for calendar years 1999 to 2004, 
by fishing method. Annual total catch estimates are scaled to Licensed Fish Receiver returns for 
1999 to 2001, and to Monthly Harvest Returns since 2002, 0.0 = less than 100 kg.  
 
Fishing method 
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Longline 
453.3
375.6
355.8
460.0
387.2
384.4
Troll 
4.3
2.2
0.1
0.5
0.1
1.7
Handline 
2.0
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.3
Other 
1.1
2.3
2.5
2.1
1.4
5.8
Total (t) 
460.6
380.3
358.5
462.6
388.7
393.3
 
 
 
Table 2.  New Zealand southern bluefin tuna catches by calendar year and fishing year (1 October to 30 
September). 
 
 
Calendar year 
t.
Fishing year
t.
1980 
130
1981 
173
1982 
305
1983 
132
1984 
93
1985 
94
1986 
82
1987 
59
1986/87
60
1988 
94
1987/88
94
1989 
437
1988/89
437
1990 
529
1989/90
529
1991 
164
1990/91
165
1992 
279
1991/92
279
1993 
217
1992/93
216
1994 
277
1993/94
277
1995 
436
1994/95
435
1996 
139
1995/96
140
1997 
334
1996/97
333
1998 
337
1997/98
331
1999 
461
1998/99
458
2000 
380
1999/00
381
2001 
358
2000/01
362
2002 
463
2001/02
452
2003 
389
2002/03
388
2004 
393
2003/04
397
 
 
6
 SBT Catches - West coast 
Latitudinal band
Jan
Mar
May
Jul
Sep
Nov
-49
-46
-44
-43
-42
-40
-39
-38
-37
-35
-33
-30
SBT Catches -East coast
Jan
Mar
May
Jul
Sep
Nov
-49
-46
-44
-43
-42
-40
-39
-38
-37
-35
-33
-30
 
 
Figure 1: The spatial and seasonal distribution of southern bluefin tuna catches (whole weight) in 2003/04, 
off the west coast of the South Island and off the east coast of the North Island, New Zealand. The largest 
circle, (west coast in June) represents 64 t of SBT. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Longline effort (number of hooks set) (vertical bars) and nominal CPUE (number of SBT per 
1000 hooks) (solid line) when targeting southern bluefin tuna for calendar years 1999 to 2004. 
 
 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Calendar year
Targeted hooks (thousands)
Southwest
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Calendar year
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
Number of fish per 1000 hooks
Northeast
 
 
7
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Distribution of longline sets targeting SBT in fishing year 2003/04 (Charter and owner-
operated vessels combined). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Longline fleet composition (LOA of each vessel) catching southern bluefin tuna in 2004 in order 
of SBT catch (by weight), together with the cumulative percentage of the total catch. 
 
165o E
175o E
170o E
180o
175o W
35o S
40o S
45o S
50o S
FMA 1
FMA 2
FMA 3
FMA 4
FMA 6
FMA 5
FMA 7
FMA 9
FMA 8
200 m
1000 m
1000 m
1000 m
200 m
200 m
200 m
1000 m
FMA 10
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1
10
19
28
37
46
55
64
73
82
Vessels in order of southern bluefin catch in 2004
Vessel Length overall (m)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Cumulative percentage of annual 
catch
 
 
2005 PHILIPPINE REPORT TO CCSBT 
 
 
 
This report will contain the number of vessels that have caught southern bluefin 
tuna and the volume of catch as well as those exported to Japan in 2005. 
 
 
As reported last year, large purse seiners from the Philippines have fished in 
adjacent neighboring countries under access, joint venture agreements or as local 
companies, with most of their catch being landed in Philippine ports for processing. 
Catches are also taken in high seas by purse seiners and longlines. With the passage of 
the 1998 Philippine Fisheries Code providing incentives for Philippine fishing vessel 
operators to fish further in the Philippine EEZ and beyond have encouraged them to 
venture in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans to catch tunas like yellowfin, bigeye with 
incidental catch of southern bluefin tuna.  
 
 
At present while the Philippines reported about 25 Philippine flagged fishing 
vessels authorized to fish southern blue fin tuna however from January to June 2005 only 
3 fishing vessels among others caught SBT. About 24.5 tons were exported to Japan. 
 
 
In the implementation of relevant CCSBT conservation and management 
measures, Philippine flagged fishing vessels are required under the Fisheries Code that 
before they can fish outside Philippine waters they should first secure an International 
Fishing Permit from the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) in addition 
to their Commercial Fishing Vessel and Gear License (CFVGL). They are also required 
to keep a daily record of fish catch and spoilage, landing points, quantity and value of 
fish caught. To have a uniform reporting system for the Philippine flagged fishing vessels, 
the Philippine Tuna Industry Council have approved for implementation a log sheet 
system which improve tuna catch statistics in the country in consonance with the 
requirement of Regional Fisheries Management Commissions. Moreover, the BFAR 
since October 2004 have implemented a moratorium in the licensing of new fishing 
vessels except when they operate outside Philippine waters. However, before a fishing 
company can import a fishing vessel for licensing in the Philippines it is required that an 
equivalent GRT must be scrapped from its fleet.  
 
 
In a recent meeting of the Tuna Council, it also approved the Philippine Tuna 
Management Plan for the sustainable management of the tuna resources. Also, an 
agreement has been entered into between a Philippine company and BFAR for the 
provision of a Monitoring, Control and surveillance system for the Philippines. 
Attachment 8-5  
 
 
Commission for the Conservation of 
Southern Bluefin Tuna 
 
Attachment 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the Tenth Meeting of the Scientific 
Committee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 September 2005 
Narita, Japan 
 
 
Attachment 10
STOCK
ASSESSMENT
REVIEW OF SRP
DATABASE
ACTIVITY
TUNA MARKET 
& FARMING 
REVIEW 
CATCH 
MONITORING 
SYSTEM
REVIEW OF 
RFMOs
COMPLIANCE 
COMMITTEE
AUTHORISED 
VESSEL LIST
COOPERATING 
NON-
MEMBERS
2005
Ongoing development of
Nov
Data Exchange
database, loading of
Commence 5th
Maintain vessel
updated and new data
year of tag
list including
Dec
(from members, other 
placements
admission of
As directed by
providers, TIS scheme,
vessels from 
CCSBT correspond
2006
tagging project), and
Operate monthly
cooperating
with potential new
Jan
production of necessary
catch monitoring
Undertake any work
Develop new terms
non-members
cooperating
Members to 
data extracts/reports
Undertake review of
system
directed by CCSBT
of reference and
non-members
Feb
consider needs
Japanese market 
to contribute to
priorities
information
review activities
Mar
and Australian
SBT farming
Apr
Tagging completed
operations
Arrange
May
Intersessional
intersessional 
Advise members
Analysis by member
progress report 
agreement
of any responses
Jun
scientists
Jul
Special Meeting
Aug
Stock assessment by
SC review of program
SC Assessment
Sep
SAG / SC
Consideration by SC
Oct
CCSBT 
CCSBT
CCSBT
CCSBT 
CCSBT
1st meeting
CCSBT
consideration
consideration
consideration
consideration
consideration
consideration
TAGGING
PROGRAM
This workplan does not include ongoing routine work of the Secretariat such as processing of TIS and tag recapture data, or promotion of the tagging program etc.
CCSBT  WORKPLAN 2006
