Commission for the Conservation of 
Southern Bluefin Tuna 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the Fourth Annual Meeting 
Second Part 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 – 22 January 1998 
Canberra, Australia 
 
 
1
Report of the Fourth Annual Meeting 
Second Part 
19 – 22 January 1998 
Canberra, Australia 
 
 
The representatives of the Governments of Australia, Japan and New Zealand 
reconvened the Fourth Annual Meeting of the Commission for the Conservation of 
Southern Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT4(2)) from 19 to 22 January 1998. 
 
Agenda Item 1: Opening of Meeting 
 
1.1 Welcoming Address 
The Chair, Mr Royce Elliott of New Zealand, welcomed delegates from Australia, Japan 
and New Zealand, and observers from the Republic of Indonesia, the Republic of Korea 
and Taiwan, and from the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources (CCAMLR) and the International Commission for the Conservation of 
Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT). 
The Chair also welcomed Mr Shuji Ishida who had replaced Mr Minoru Morimoto as 
the Head of the Japanese delegation. 
Japan’s opening statement is included as Attachment A. 
Australia’s opening statement is included as Attachment B. 
New Zealand’s opening statement is included as Attachment C. 
The Chair noted that given the time constraints of the meeting, the observers had agreed 
to forgo opening statements. However, he invited the observers to make comments on 
particular issues as they arose during the agenda. 
 
1.2 Adoption of the Agenda 
The agreed agenda and list of participants are at Attachments D and E. 
 
1.3 Appointment of Rapporteurs 
Rapporteurs were appointed as follows: for Australia, Mr Barrington and Ms Wallace, 
for Japan, Mr Komatsu and Mr Morishita, and for New Zealand, Ms Futschek and Ms 
Robinson. 
 
Agenda Item 2: Relationship with Non Members 
 
The Commission adopted the Action Plan at (Attachment F) and provided copies to 
representatives of Korea, Indonesia and Taiwan. The Commission also approved a 
Program for approaches to non-members (Attachment G). 
The Chair noted that the Negotiation Brief that had been agreed to by the Commission 
and distributed to members would remain a confidential document and would not be 
included in the record of the meeting. 
The Commission noted the need for an instrument to formalise cooperation between the 
CCSBT and Taiwan regarding Taiwan's adherence to the Commission's management 
and conservation measures. Australia and New Zealand confirmed their preference for a 
memorandum of understanding. 
Japan stated that due to the sensitive nature of its relationship with Taiwan, it needed 
 
2
further time to decide on the appropriate form of an instrument. The position of the 
Japanese Government was to consider the above approach on its merits, incorporating 
political and legal concerns. It expressed its support for the Commission seeking 
cooperation with Taiwan, and undertook to provide general comments on the 
Commission's proposed approach, and the most appropriate type of instrument to use. 
New Zealand sought to confirm the timing for the visit by the Commission delegation to 
non-members in March or April 1998. Japan advised that it was unable to commit to a 
specific date, due to the possibility of having to attend other meetings at that time, but it 
would provide definite availability dates via diplomatic channels as soon as possible. 
New Zealand sought comments from Japan on the paper it had distributed at the May 
workshop concerning possible arrangements for cooperation with Taiwan. Japan 
suggested that the first step would be to seek a strong commitment from Taiwan that it 
would cooperate with the Commission. Following that the Japanese Government would 
make a final decision on the most appropriate framework. New Zealand noted that at the 
first meeting with representatives from Taiwan, the delegation would urge catch 
restraint and seek the provision of accurate catch data. The delegation would also 
outline, in general, the obligations and rights that Taiwan would have in cooperating 
with CCSBT. Subsequently the Commission could make a final decision on the nature 
of the arrangement with Taiwan. 
- 
Implementation of Article 15 of the Convention 
New Zealand noted that under Article 15 of the Convention, members were obliged to 
take active steps to deter fishing activities for SBT by non members where such 
activities could adversely affect the attainment of the objective of the Commission.  
New Zealand sought comment from Japan on reports that Japanese interests had 
chartered bunkering vessels which were also used by non members, that it provided a 
market for non member SBT catch, and that there was considerable investment by 
Japanese interests in non-member SBT fishing operations. 
New Zealand was confident that it was meeting its Article 15 obligations and advised 
that it had procedures in place to prevent New Zealand fishing interests from entering 
into charter or joint fishing arrangements for SBT with non-members. It was not aware 
of any bunkering of non-member vessels fishing for SBT or any investment by New 
Zealand nationals in non-member SBT fishing operations. 
Australia advised that it had similar restrictions in place to prevent joint ventures with 
and port access to vessels from states which fished for SBT outside the CCSBT regime. 
Japan advised that it understood that some of its nationals were working as crew on 
board non-member SBT fishing vessels. A directive (albeit voluntary) had been issued 
to its nationals to not operate on such vessels, however, there are constitutional 
problems in restricting selection of jobs by its nationals. Japan agreed to provide a copy 
of the directive to the other members, out-of-session. 
Japan reported that a Panamanian-flagged vessel had been chartered to provide bunker 
services to Japanese fishing vessels only. It was aware that after the contract had expired 
the company had the discretion to be engaged in other operations, but it had not been 
involved in providing fuel to any non-member SBT fishing vessels. 
Japan said it had a free trade marketplace for SBT and therefore, no trade restriction is 
in place for SBT. Japan has a system to regulate investment by Japanese in non-member 
SBT fishing operations, and it suggested that this could be discussed at a later meeting. 
New Zealand sought a copy of Japan's regulations and noted its view that there was an 
obligation to discourage non member fishing activities that sought a market for SBT in 
 
3
Japan. 
 
Agenda Item 3: Relationship with IOTC 
 
Japan stated that although the CCSBT had been established to manage the SBT stock, it 
had, in Japan's view, failed to agree on management measures for SBT based on 
scientific evidence. Japan recognised that the Commission had set a global TAC and 
national allocations each year, but considered these to be based on political 
considerations. Japan was of the view that, although in organisations such as ICCAT and 
IATTC, of which Japan is also a member, the tuna stocks were managed on the basis of 
scientific evidence and TACs set accordingly, the CCSBT had not fulfilled this basic 
task. Japan observed that the IOTC could be able to perform the tasks when the 
scientists of its members were brought together. 
New Zealand disagreed with Japan's assessment of CCSBT's performance.  New 
Zealand believed Japan’s statements to the effect that Japan's continued cooperation in 
the CCSBT was dependant on an increase in quota was inappropriate and unacceptable.  
New Zealand saw Japan's seeking to transfer allegiance to the IOTC as being 
undertaken in pursuit of an increase in SBT catch. 
New Zealand and Australia noted that Japan's position contradicted the previous 
consensus position about the relationship between IOTC and CCSBT as agreed by the 
CCSBT. They further noted that the IOTC has formally recognised CCSBT's mandate to 
manage SBT and that IOTC has neither the organisational or infrastructural capacity to 
manage SBT, or a scientific process that is capable of resolving the stock assessment 
difficulties facing CCSBT. 
Australia stated that the annual management decisions CCSBT had made were in fact 
based on scientific considerations and were no different in character from the 
decision-making processes adopted in other international tuna bodies. New Zealand 
noted that, significantly, the IOTC had shown no intent to manage SBT despite Japan’s 
recent, unsuccessful attempts have IOTC form an SBT sub-commission. 
Australia distributed a paper which summarised its view of the relationship between the 
CCSBT and the IOTC.  It recommended that the Commission agree to prepare a draft 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the two organisations for presentation 
to the IOTC at its Third annual meeting in 1998. The MOU would set out the respective 
roles of two bodies and their responsibilities in relation to SBT, and identify areas where 
they will cooperate. 
Japan provided comments on the Australian paper and subsequent discussion revealed 
that there would be substantial work involved in reaching an agreed position on the 
contents of such an MOU and the matter was deferred for consideration at the next 
Annual Meeting of CCSBT. 
Japan stated that as the IOTC was a new body, it had little meaning to compare the 
IOTC with the CCSBT. The question is not what the two organisations had achieved but 
what they can achieve in the future. As Japan believed CCSBT had produced no 
progress since its establishment, it was only logical to utilise the IOTC which had the 
capacity to manage SBT. Japan advised that it intended to propose, at IOTC3, 
management steps for SBT under Article 9 of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission 
Agreement, indicating that the steps would be similar to those Japan had sought at 
CCSBT. 
Given Japan's obligations under the CCSBT, New Zealand considered it quite 
 
4
inappropriate for Japan to initiate and progress consideration of management measures 
for SBT in the IOTC. Given that Japan had clear responsibilities to collaborate with 
members of the CCSBT on SBT management issues, Japan was obliged to provide 
details of the proposal it intended to submit to IOTC. New Zealand said that arguments 
that Japan used to justify their proposal to transfer management to IOTC were an 
attempt to degrade the role and responsibility of CCSBT. 
Australia considered that Japan appeared to be misrepresenting the respective capacities 
and past actions of the CCSBT and IOTC in relation to SBT conservation and 
management. To undermine the Commission in this way was contrary to the obligations 
and responsibilities of a CCSBT member. Australia was also concerned that Japan's 
proposed actions may unnecessarily expose the member counties and their respective 
industries to action in other international fora. 
Australia asked Japan whether it sought to withdraw from the CCSBT. Japan replied 
that it did not have any intention of giving up its obligations and rights as a member of 
the CCSBT. However, after considering what had been achieved so far by the 
Commission, whereby there was no agreement on the SBT stock status, or any 
resolution of uncertainty in the current models, Japan considered that there was little 
room for future progress in the Commission and hence it saw value in moving the 
functions of the CCSBT to the IOTC. 
Australia reaffirmed its view that the CCSBT had full competency and capacity to 
manage SBT on a global basis and that all communications to date from the 
Commission to IOTC supported this position. Japan reported that in the second annual 
IOTC meeting, it had stated that the relationship between the IOTC and other 
inter-governmental organisations, such as the CCSBT, should be reviewed and renewed 
at an appropriate time taking into account the activities and functions of those other 
organisations. 
Japan advised that it would be circulating through diplomatic channels a proposal to 
make amendments to the CCSBT Convention, in accordance with Article 21. 
Australia outlined its view of the relative capacities of the two bodies to conduct 
scientific research and management of SBT and argued that CCSBT was already 
recognised as the regional fisheries management body with primary responsibility for 
management of SBT. 
Japan's views differed on some of the matters raised by Australia. 
Australia and New Zealand considered that the Commission could take tangible steps to 
address key issues of dissatisfaction with the scientific process raised by Japan, as well 
as on questions of non-member accession/cooperation. 
Australia noted that there was basic agreement by the scientists from all member 
countries on the current stock status, and their differences of view related to stock 
projection in the future. In response to Japan's concerns regarding the scientific process, 
Australia proposed that the Commission agree to undertake a peer review of the 
scientific process by a panel of external experts. The Commission decided that the 
review should proceed, with basic parameters as outlined at Attachment H, and further 
decided that costs for the 'peer review' would be covered by funds from the 
Commission's reserve fund. 
 
Agenda Item 4: Certification of trade in southern bluefin tuna 
 
The Commission considered the paper Possible Certification System of Trade in 
 
5
Southern Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT/9801/5). 
Australia thanked the Secretariat for preparing the paper and considered that such a 
system was necessary to effectively monitor the trade of SBT. It sought an update from 
Japan on its consideration of this issue since CCSBT4(1). 
Japan endorsed the establishment of a working group on this issue as is provided for in 
the action plan for non-members and proposed that the workshop be held in Japan, so as 
to provide for the participation of all the Japanese agencies concerned. Although unable 
to commit to specific dates at this time, Japan suggested that the workshop be held prior 
to the 1998 Scientific Committee, in either June or July 1998. Japan noted that it had 
doubts on the necessity of a trade information collection scheme because SBT is a 
single stock species (ie. with a single management area there is no need to collect trade 
data by area) and some of the catch by non members is not traded internationally.  
Japan stated that a trade information collection scheme is not a panacea for the 
non-member issues. 
New Zealand considered that a trade certification scheme for SBT was a necessary 
measure to encourage accession/cooperation by non members, and supported, in 
principle, the development of such a scheme. New Zealand supported the proposal to 
convene a workshop on the issue, but remained concerned at the lack of terms of 
reference for the workshop and the lack of a clear statement by Japan that it supported, 
even in principle, a SBT trade certification scheme. New Zealand considered trade 
certification was part of the wider issue of action in relation to non-members and was 
consistent with obligations under Article 15 of the Convention requiring members to 
discourage SBT fishing activities of non-members. A lack of support by Japan for trade 
certification led to New Zealand questioning Japan's commitment to efforts to 
discourage non-members from taking SBT. 
Australia noted that the uncertainty inherent in the SBT import statistics provided by 
Japan (Attachment I) further confirmed the need for a more accurate collection of  
data on SBT trade. Japan explained its interpretation and observation of possible 
confusion in the import statistics from Taiwan and Australia. 
 
Agenda Item 5: Consideration of an Experimental Fishing Program 
 
The Chair noted that this item followed on from EFP proposals tabled at previous 
meetings which initiated the scientific work on Steps 1 and 2 to evaluate the risks and 
benefits of an EFP. 
Japan commented that the 1997 Scientific Committee's discussions on Steps 1 & 2 took 
place to evaluate the effect of additional catch, but could not be completed because of 
differences of views over the hypotheses surrounding the stock assessment. Japan drew 
the attention to Attachment T of the Summary Record of CCSBT4(1) which concluded 
that there was little prospect of completing Steps 1 & 2 before the next Scientific 
Committee. 
Japan expressed its deep regrets regarding this situation in view of its efforts to 
implement the steps for the implementation of EFP. Japan considered that it was 
essential to implement EFP to resolve these uncertainties in the SBT stock assessment 
and that to delay commencement of the EFP any further would reflect badly on the 
CCSBT as a responsible fisheries body. 
New Zealand recognised that an appropriately designed and implemented EFP could 
potentially resolve some uncertainty in the stock assessment. However, it noted that the 
 
6
CPUE interpretation is only one of the many areas of uncertainty in the stock 
assessment. New Zealand considered that other sources of uncertainty had greater 
influence on the output of the stock assessment and, therefore, were more important to 
resolve. Both Australia and New Zealand considered that additional catch would be 
likely to pose an unacceptable additional risk to the stock. The Commission had 
committed to a program of work to evaluate the benefits and risks associated with EFP.  
New Zealand and Australia remain committed to resolving the issues that would allow 
Steps 1 and 2 to be completed. 
Japan reported that it was considering implementing an EFP outside of the Japanese 
national SBT quota allocation, because results of the EFP would be available and 
beneficial to all members. Japan advised that it did not intend to undertake an EFP 
unilaterally, but would invite New Zealand and Australia to participate. 
New Zealand was extremely concerned with Japan's proposal to unilaterally undertake 
an EFP and stated that action by Japan to undertake an EFP in the absence of a 
consensus decision by the Commission, using catch in addition to the level of Japan's 
national allocation for 1996/97, equated to predetermined over fishing which is a 
violation of Japan's obligations under Article 8 of the Convention. 
Australia observed that the peer review of the Scientific Committee’s stock assessment 
process would provide an alternative means to resolve the current impasse concerning 
the stock assessment. Australia also referred to Attachment T of CCSBT4(1) which 
outlined the three basic problems in stock assessment. Australia noted that the proposed 
"peer review" of the Scientific Committee's process was directed at addressing these 
problems, whereas an EFP would not necessarily be as effective. 
Japan reminded the meeting of the view that the most serious problem in the stock 
assessment is the weighting of different assumptions of uncertainties which was based 
on the personal interpretations of scientists. Japan believes that no resolution of this 
problem would be achieved unless new data and information becomes available, and 
saw no logical reason to expect a peer review to solve this problem. 
New Zealand considered there were three priority areas in the stock assessment that 
required further resolution: (a) resolution of the differences between the implementation 
of the VPA and related models used by Australia and Japan; (b) characterisation of the 
non-member catch by Taiwan and the Republic of Korea with respect to seasons and 
areas of catch and effort, as well as size composition; and (c) development of an 
alternative approach to the projection methodology. 
New Zealand suggested that the completion of EFP evaluation Steps 1 & 2 would 
contribute greatly to efforts to harmonise VPA approaches within the Scientific 
Committee. It considered that development of port sampling programs, similar to that 
operated in the Republic of Indonesia, combined with some 'at sea' collaborative work 
with Taiwan and the Republic of Korea, could address the uncertainty related to 
non-member catches, while consideration of alternatives to stock projections could 
result from the 'peer review' of the Scientific Committee as proposed by Australia. 
Australia considered that there had been substantial progress towards a common 
understanding of stock status for SBT over the years and the current areas in the stock 
assessment where differences existed lent themselves to ‘peer review’. This would 
enable the Commission and the individual members to move forward in enhancing the 
scientific processes of the Commission. Australia considered that the 'peer review' 
needed to be an independent and impartial assessment of the stock assessment processes 
of the CCSBT, with members agreeing to accept the outputs of the review. 
 
7
Australia called on Japan to give an assurance that it would not undertake a unilateral 
EFP outside of the framework of the Commission. 
 
Agenda Item 6: Total Allowable Catch and Quota Allocations 
 
6.1 Total Allowable Catch 
Japan proposed an increase in TAC of 3,000 t, noting that this was in addition to any 
quota offer to non members. Japan's proposal was based on the projections made by 
Japanese scientists of future stock size which showed a high probability that the parental 
stock would recover to 1980 levels by 2020. 
Australia stated that given the severely depleted stock status, it was vital that the 
precautionary approach be taken in relation to the TAC and national allocations. It 
expressed its frustration at the increases in the catch of SBT being taken by those 
fishing outside the Convention arrangement. This rapid increase in non-member catch 
necessitated additional caution in the Commission's setting of a TAC.  Australian 
scientists' assessments showed that the SBT stock was likely to remain in a depleted 
state for many years. 
Australia's preliminary analysis of the Japanese RTMP data indicated that CPUE in the 
South East Indian Ocean was only 63% of the 1996 and 53% of the 1995 level; CPUE 
off Tasmania was 77% of the 1996 and 68% of the 1995 level; and off South Africa 
CPUE was 112% of the 1996 and 85% of the 1995 level. These trends did not give an 
optimistic picture of stock status. Australia noted that the scientists from all of the 
Commission members agreed that the stock is currently at less than 10% of the 1960 
level of parental biomass. Between 1987 and 1993 juvenile catch rates increased, but 
these had recently declined again. In the last few years juveniles had been heavily 
exploited to the extent that any increase in recruitment that may have occurred is 
unlikely to contribute to rebuilding the parental stock. 
Japan suggested that any changes between the 1996 and 1997 CPUE statistics could be 
attributed to the El Nino effect. It noted that CPUE had increased for Japanese vessels 
over the last year in the fishing ground off South Africa which represented 60% of the 
Japanese SBT fishery. Japan's view was that the overall CPUE for SBT for 1997 is 
similar to that of 1996, in contrast to the Australian interpretation of the RTMP data. 
New Zealand stated its concern over the depleted stock status as evidenced by the 
consensus decision in the 1996 Scientific report that the SBT stock was at 5-8% of the 
1960 level of parental biomass and 25-38% of 1980 level of parental biomass. Both 
New Zealand and Australian scientists estimated that the probability was less than 30% 
that the stock would recover to the 1980 level of parental biomass by 2020. Several 
other factors concerned New Zealand, including the high exploitation rate of juveniles; 
the sharp increase in non-member catch; and the optimistic bias of projections taken to 
date. New Zealand stated that the only responsible action the Commission could take 
was to restrain overall catch. This action was consistent with the precautionary approach 
which all parties had committed to in other international fora. Overall catch restraint 
could be achieved through reducing the catch of either non members or Commission 
members. However, advancement of non member accession/cooperation had been 
stalled by Japan's refusal to take action based on linking of dialogue with non members 
to catch increases for current members. Therefore, given the lack of any progress 
towards restraining the catch of non members, New Zealand proposed to reduce the 
TAC by 3,000 t. This would be a substantial step toward achieving the objective of 
 
8
stock recovery to the 1980 level of parental biomass by 2020. 
New Zealand noted Japan had suggested that New Zealand consider unilateral catch 
reductions. However, New Zealand firmly believed that it was the Commission's 
responsibility to address the serious status of the SBT stock. Unilateral catch reductions 
would disadvantage New Zealand's strategic position in the Commission; it would 
disadvantage NZ industry; and it would not have an appreciable impact on overall 
removals as New Zealand's proportion of the total SBT catch was less than 3% of total 
removals. New Zealand urged parties to seriously consider how catch restraint could be 
achieved at this meeting. 
Japan responded that it could not accept New Zealand's proposal for a 3,000 t reduction, 
as it believed the stock could sustain a 3,000 t increase. Japan noted that while the 
precautionary approach was included in the UNIA, that Agreement is not yet in force.  
In addition, Japan's view was that the precautionary approach has a wide range of 
interpretation and was, therefore, ambiguous. It was the view of Japan that taking an 
extreme precautionary approach, such as stopping fishing, did not reflect Japan's 
interpretation of stock status. As there were scientific uncertainties regarding SBT stock 
status, in Japan's view, it was necessary to work on research programs which would 
resolve one of the major uncertainties. 
New Zealand responded by pointing out that the precautionary approach, as expressed 
in the UNIA, was not ambiguous - the absence of scientific data did not provide a 
rationale for failing to take conservation and management measures. In New Zealand's 
view, Japan was suggesting that uncertainty in the stock assessment meant that a catch 
increase was an acceptable action. However a catch increase was clearly inconsistent 
with the precautionary approach expressed in UNIA and was irresponsible, given the 
current stock status. 
Australia considered that the actual SBT stock status should be the basis for setting the 
TAC. Australia noted that the precautionary approach was clearly defined in both UNIA 
and the FAO Code of Conduct on Responsible Fishing and was widely used in fisheries, 
and thus directly relevant to matters before the Commission. 
 
6.2 National Allocations 
Australia advised that it would stand by the Commission's previous decision on SBT 
TAC and national allocations until agreement on quotas can be reached for 1997/98. 
New Zealand stated that in the event that as no consensus decision had been made on a 
TAC and national allocations for 1997/98, for its part, New Zealand would restrain its 
catch to the national allocation (420 t) set by the Commission for 1996/97. This was the 
last time a decision on TAC was made by the Commission. New Zealand believed this 
was the only responsible action to take and that it would be appropriate for the other 
parties to state a similar undertaking in the absence of a Commission decision. 
New Zealand registered its serious concern at Japan's refusal to commit to restricting 
catch. Of greater concern was Japan's suggestion it might unilaterally increase catch 
beyond 6,065 t based on their view of the stock assessment. Such a step, in New 
Zealand's view, amounted to predetermined overfishing. 
Japan stated that there was sufficient scientific evidence to increase the TAC by 3,000 t.  
Japan then stated that it was necessary for the Commission to conduct EFP in order to 
fully function as a responsible regional fisheries management organisation. Therefore, 
Japan expressed serious regrets on the situation that Japan's requests for TAC increase 
and EFP had not been accepted. It was also necessary to consider to amend the 
 
9
Convention in order to have the CCSBT function appropriately and to fulfil the 
objective of the Convention to secure the conservation and optimum utilisation of SBT 
through appropriate management. In addition, it was necessary to consider introducing 
measures in the IOTC relating to SBT conservation, management and optimal use. 
Considering Japan's scientific evidence and views, and the situation that Australia and 
New Zealand had been conducting their fishing operations by unilateral declarations 
before the Commission's consensus on TAC and national allocations, Japan believed 
that it was becoming unavoidable that it had to consider methods to break the impasse 
in the CCSBT. Japan said those methods would include the possibility of implementing, 
by a unilateral declaration, an EFP, in addition to the fishing for the former Japanese 
national allocation. Japan would be making this declaration soon and it would be 
communicating amendments to the Convention through diplomatic channels at a later 
date. 
In the absence of a decision on a TAC for 1997/98, the Commission could not set 
national allocations. 
 
Agenda Item 7: Program of Work for 1997-98 
 
The Commission approved its work program for 1997/98 as presented at Attachment J. 
 
Agenda Item 8: Finance and Administration 
 
8.1 Data Management 
The Chair introduced the paper Data Management (CCSBT/9801/7) and recalled that 
members had agreed at CCSBT4(1) that there was a role for the Secretariat in the 
collection, collation and distribution of data, but that further consideration was needed 
on the scope of the data to be held by the Secretariat. The Secretariat, in cooperation 
with Japan, had prepared the draft paper for consideration by members out-of session, 
however, no comments had been received in the interim period. 
New Zealand expressed concerns about potential duplication with the Scientific 
Committee and contention arising from the interpretation of CPUE data by the 
Secretariat. 
The Commission reaffirmed its decision that there was a role for the Secretariat to 
maintain data for the purposes of information exchange with other organisations and to 
provide information to the public. 
In discussion, delegates agreed that the database be comprised of a summary dataset 
provided by the Scientific Committee and interpretation of these data would be subject 
to the overview of the Scientific Committee. Data would be aggregated at the Statistical 
Area level and limited to data that were available in the public domain. Australia noted 
there was a need to clarify a number of technical details in the specifications of the 
database. 
New Zealand and Australia undertook to prepare and circulate a revised paper 
containing their suggested changes and incorporating the agreed amendments to 
members for consideration prior to the next meeting. 
 
8.2 Costs of Meetings Outside Canberra 
The Commission considered the Secretariat paper Costs of meeting outside of Canberra 
(CCSBT/9801/8). 
 
10
New Zealand referred to the Commission's policy from 1994 concerning costs for 
meetings held outside of Canberra. The Commission had agreed that the host country 
for meetings held away from headquarters will ensure that the Commission will incur 
no additional costs as a result of the meeting being held away from headquarters.  
Accordingly, New Zealand advocated that the costs of travel for the Secretariat staff to 
meetings held outside of Canberra should not be funded by the Commission. New 
Zealand also stated that the Secretariat had an essential role in the facilitation of 
meetings by the Commission and its subsidiary bodies, as set out in Rule 10 of the 
Rules of Procedure. 
Australia also recalled the previous position, but considered the Secretariat's proposal to 
be acceptable. 
The Commission acknowledged that it was desirable to provide consistent 
administrative support wherever Commission meetings, resumed meetings and 
subsidiary meetings were held. 
Japan identified two potential negative effects arising from the approach proposed by 
New Zealand: (a) because of the costs of the Secretariat attending a meeting the host 
might not wish to bring the Secretariat to that meeting; and (b) because of the additional 
costs to be born by the host, an important meeting might simply not be held. Japan 
recommended that all Commission meetings be considered equal, as that would 
ultimately benefit the Commission. 
Australia proposed that the costs for the Secretariat to attend the annual Commission 
meetings, resumed annual meeting and the Scientific Committee meetings when held 
away from Canberra be met by the Commission, with other meetings handled on a 
case-by-case basis as to whether the Commission would meet the Secretariat's costs. 
Japan supported this proposal and observed that the 1994 consensus probably did not 
consider the ramifications of the decision, that Japan had alluded to above. 
A 1998 budget was adopted which would enable the minimum Secretariat staff to attend 
all the Commission meetings without increasing the current level of the member 
contributions. 
The Commission agreed that for meetings set out in the work program agreed for 
1997/98, the costs of meetings outside Canberra in excess of those that would normally 
be incurred for a Canberra meeting, excepting Secretariat travel costs, would be covered 
by the host country. 
The Commission agreed that for 1998, the Secretariat's travel costs associated with 
attending annual meetings of the Commission and Scientific Committee which are held 
away from Canberra would be met by the Commission. 
New Zealand gave its endorsement for this proposal for 1998 only, noting that it had 
concerns on this matter and wished to revisit this item in the context of the 
Commission's budget for 1999. The Commission confirmed that the decision for 1998 
did not alter the policy of the Commission on this issue, as determined in 1994. 
Japan indicated that it had problems with the 1994 policy, and notified the possibility of 
a proposal to amend this policy in the future. 
 
8.3 Budget for 1998 
The Commission adopted the budget for 1998 as presented in Attachment K. 
Australia circulated a brief paper outlining the parameters for the peer review of the 
Scientific Committee's assessment process. Members agreed that the parameters would 
form the basis of planning and implementing the peer review, with details on the precise 
 
11
level of funds to be allocated for conducting the review to be confirmed by the members 
by correspondence out-of-session. The Commission also agreed that it would fund the 
review from the Commission's reserve fund. 
 
Agenda Item 9: Other Business 
 
9.1 Selection of the CCSBT Documents to be Confidential 
The Commission noted it did not have a policy on the confidentiality of Commission 
documents. The Commission deferred discussion on a proposed policy on this matter to 
its next annual meeting. 
 
9.2 Greenpeace Protest Campaign 
The Executive Secretary of the Commission  reported that Greenpeace Germany had 
initiated a campaign requesting Greenpeace members to send letters to the CCSBT 
Secretariat demanding that fishing for SBT cease. To date, an estimated 110,000 letters 
and cards had been received by the Secretariat. The Commission members undertook to 
provide comments on the draft letter from the Secretariat responding to the 
correspondence. Because a substantial proportion of the correspondence did not include 
return addresses, the Commission agreed that responses to the campaign would include: 
a direct response to Greenpeace Germany, a statement on the CCSBT web site; 
utilisation of media releases; and, single responses to groups of individuals (such as 
schools). 
 
9.3 FAO Coordinating Working Party on Fishery Statistics 
The Secretariat informed the meeting it had prepared a paper Coordinating Working 
Party on Fishery Statistics (CCSBT/9801/11), that outlined further details on, and the 
obligations arising from the CCSBT seeking membership to the CWP. It noted that it 
usually took several years for membership of CWP to be resolved through the FAO, and 
the CWP membership. 
The Commission agreed to seek membership to the CWP, but undertook to consider the 
nature and extent of obligations and budgetary cost implications of involvement in the 
CWP at a later stage. 
 
9.4 Headquarters Agreement 
The Headquarters Agreement was signed by the Chairman on behalf of the Commission 
and Ms Harwood on behalf of the Australian Government. 
Australia provided the Commission a Note proposing an agreed interpretation of  
Article 20 relating to Australia's migration laws. The Commission authorised the 
Executive Secretary to reply to the Australian Note in positive terms (Attachment L). 
 
Agenda Item 10: Close of the Meeting 
 
10.1 Election of Chair and Vice Chair for 1998 
The meeting did not close, therefore elections did not occur. 
 
10.2 Adoption of the Report of the Meeting 
The meeting approved and adopted the report of the meeting. 
 
 
12
10.3 Closure of the Meeting 
The Commission acknowledged the excellent work of the Chair during the course of the 
meeting. All delegations acknowledged the interpreters and the Secretariat for their hard 
work. 
Australia advised that it objected strongly to Japan's expressed intention to consider 
embarking on a unilateral experimental fishing program (EFP) involving catches 
beyond the level of its most recent national SBT allocation of 6,065 t. 
Australia stated that it considered any action by Japan to initiate such an EFP in the 
absence of the Commission's endorsement to be: (a) incompatible with Japan's 
obligations as a party to the Convention; and (b) prejudicial to the Commission's ability 
to discharge its duty under Article 8 (3) (c) to set a responsible SBT total allowable 
catch (TAC) for 1997-98, and, as such, was a matter that went to the heart of the 
implementation of the Convention. 
Australia shared the disappointment of other members that the Commission had been 
unable to complete its business at the meeting. Australia remained committed to 
working with other members to resolve outstanding differences and to completing the 
program of work set out in the work plan. 
Australia reiterated its support of the CCSBT in achieving its mandate and conservation 
and management of the global SBT stock and expected other members to do so as well. 
Australia considered that the Commission should reconvene as soon as possible to 
resolve outstanding matters relating to the TAC and EFP. 
Australia was pleased to see that the Commission had commenced meaningful work on 
the non-member issue as well as having agreed on a peer review to help achieve a 
greater degree of consensus in the CCSBT stock assessment process. 
Australia acknowledged the patience and good direction of the Chair, the cooperation of 
all delegations, the strong support from the Secretariat, and the unfailing good humour 
and excellence of the interpreters. 
 
In making its concluding remarks, New Zealand voiced its disappointment at the stance 
Japan had taken on a number of issues during the meeting. 
1.  Japan had caused significant delays in allowing a consensus to enable the 
Commission to take steps to achieve the accession/cooperation of non-members. 
2.  Japan had stated an intention to consider overfishing through EFP outside the last 
agreed quota allocation to Japan of 6,065 t and without a consensus decision of the 
Commission. 
3.  Japan had refused to state its intentions with regard to whether, in the absence of a 
decision on TAC, it would restrain its fishing to within the last agreed quota allocation 
to Japan of 6,065 t. 
4.  Japan indicated, on a number of occasions during the meeting, a lack of 
commitment to CCSBT as a management regime and its intention to transfer allegiance 
to the IOTC despite their obligations to CCSBT and IOTC's lack of any infrastructure or 
scientific process to support the management of SBT. In addition, Japan refused to 
divulge the exact nature of the management proposal they intended to take to IOTC. 
5.  New Zealand believed SBT trade certification to be a critical element in achieving 
the accession or cooperation of non parties. Whilst Japan had agreed to the Commission 
holding a trade information scheme workshop, this workshop has no terms of reference 
and Japan would make no commitment to proceed to certification in the future. 
These approaches by Japan, coupled with their stated lack of commitment to the 
 
13
Commission, provided New Zealand with very grave concerns for the ongoing function 
of the Commission and for the future for SBT. 
New Zealand noted that significant issues that were the responsibility of the 
Commission remained unresolved. New Zealand reaffirmed its commitment to active 
negotiating in good faith to resolve these issues. As no decision had been made to close 
the meeting, New Zealand looked forward the resumption of the adjourned meeting as 
soon as possible to resolve the outstanding issues. 
 
Japan made the following closing remarks: 
'This meeting has achieved much progress including the adoption of the Action Plan for 
non-members and a series of workshops on many subjects. On the other hand, Japan 
considers it extremely regrettable to have no agreement on TAC and EFP, which are of 
vital importance for Japan and the Commission. Because the management of the SBT 
stocks, especially establishment of TAC, is one of the most essential functions of the 
CCSBT, the failure to agree on the issues of TAC and EFP demonstrates that there are 
problems in the basic functions of the CCSBT. 
Japan is committed to exercising its utmost efforts to revive the original or intended 
functions of the CCSBT. 
With the absence of agreements on TAC and national allocations, it is unavoidable that  
Japan will have to take responsibility for its own fishing activities, taking account of the 
past achievements and developments at the CCSBT. 
As we all have been spending our utmost efforts, even meeting till midnight, it is 
appropriate to close the CCSBT4 at this stage. However, Japan is always willing to meet 
and consult with other members in order to discuss the important issues of TAC and 
EFP. 
Many representatives from the Japanese fishing industry, all the way from Japan, have 
been present at this meeting. We would like to revive the CCSBT's original and 
intended functions, so that they can think it was worth coming to this meeting. 
This is my first CCSBT meeting and I cannot help feeling that this organisation is very 
strange as we are still meeting at 2:30 am. I have heard that this situation is much better 
than last year's meeting. 
Finally, I would like to thank the Chairman, Secretariat, and interpreters who have been 
very patient and able. 
Thank you.' 
 
 
 
 
 
Royce Elliott 
Chair 
22 January 1998 
 
List of Attachments 
 
 
Attachment A  
Japan's Opening Statement 
 
Attachment B  
Australia's Opening Statement 
 
Attachment C  
Opening Statement - New Zealand 
 
Attachment D  
Agenda 
 
Attachment E  
List of Participants 
 
Attachment F  
Action Plan Concerning Promotion of Accession to, and Cooperation 
 
 
 
 
with, CCSBT by Non-member States and entities 
 
Attachment G  
Program for Approaches to Non-Parties 
 
Attachment H  
Peer Review of Scientific Committee's Stock Assessment Process 
 
Attachment I  
Statistics for Importation of SBT by Japan 
 
Attachment J  
Work Program for 1997/98 
 
Attachment K  
Budget - 1998 
 
Attachment L  
Suggested Text of Reply to the Australian Note concerning the  
 
 
 
 
Interpretation of Article 20 of the Headquarters Agreement 
 
Attachment A 
 
Japan's Opening Statement 
 
 
Mr Chairman, Delegates of Member Countries, observers. 
On behalf of the Japanese delegation, I would like to say a few words at the outset of 
the Resumed Fourth Annual Meeting of the Commission for the Conservation of 
Southern Bluefin Tuna. 
First, if I may introduce myself, my name is Ishida, Councillor of the Fisheries Agency 
of Japan. As Mr Morimoto's successor, I will be leading the Japanese delegation at this 
meeting. Mr Morimoto has been promoted to the position of Deputy Director-General 
last October when personnel changes took place in the Fisheries Agency. In his new 
position, he is overseeing all aspects of Japan's fisheries administration. Mr Morimoto 
told me that meetings of CCSBT are quite strenuous and demanding. I will be grateful if 
you can share with me the same understanding and co-operation you have extended to 
my predecessor. 
At the Annual Meeting held in September last year, after difficult negotiations, the Draft 
Action Plan concerning Non-Members was developed and tentatively agreed to.  
However, conflicting views over this Commission's primary task, that is the setting of 
the level of Total Allowable Catch for member countries, as well as the Experimental 
Fishing Program, which is to facilitate stock assessment work, which in turn provides 
the basis of all conservation management measures, forced us to adjourn the meeting.  
At the informal meeting held last December, there was no substantive progress, 
however I am informed that the parties were able to confirm the difference of views 
quite clearly. 
The impasse of CCSBT is an indication of CCSBT not functioning very well at this 
point in time, and this is a regrettable situation. In order to resolve the situation, all 
contracting parties must face the issues of TAC and EFP with a realistic and responsible 
approach, and by showing the sprit of co-operation, we would like to see an agreement.  
At the same time from a broader perspective of conservation and effective utilisation of 
SBT stock, we are recognising the need to manage the stock through other appropriate 
international frameworks. 
As we are limited with time at this meeting, while we are willing to have detailed 
discussions regarding our views under each agenda item, as we have seen in the case of 
Greenpeace supporters mainly from Germany sending protest post cards since the end 
of last year, the activities of CCSBT are receiving attention from various environmental 
groups, and in that sense, it is very much our responsibility to swiftly consolidate the 
co-operative framework within CCSBT and to secure conservation and effective 
utilisation of the SBT stock, which is the primary function of this Commission. 
I wish to conclude my remarks by expressing my hope to have constructive discussions 
in a co-operative manner over the next 3 days and to show that CCSBT is functioning 
effectively as a regional fisheries management organisation. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Attachment B 
 
AUSTRALIA'S OPENING STATEMENT 
 
 
It is my pleasure to welcome the delegations from Japan and New Zealand and 
observers to Canberra for this resumed session of the CCSBT. I also extend a personal 
welcome to Mr Ishida as the new Head of the Japanese delegation. 
This is a crucial meeting for CCSBT. 
We are aware of frustrations on all sides that we have not been able to reach consensus 
to date, but we are convinced that this can be achieved at this meeting. 
There is a strong international spotlight on the Commission, and the members' 
approaches to meeting their obligations under the enabling Convention. As founding 
parties, we all have a clear duty to ensure that the Commission puts in place responsible 
management measures at this meeting for 1997/98. 
Australia is extremely concerned that the hard work done so far by members of the 
Commission towards securing recovery of the SBT stock is being placed in serious 
jeopardy by catches made by countries operating outside the CCSBT regime. 
This meeting must decide upon and announce, clear and tangible action for bring these 
countries within the regime. A closely related issue is the vital need for a much better 
information base concerning trade in SBT. 
Quotas, certification and action on non-member accession are the top priorities for this 
meeting. 
Australia remains committed to seeing the Commission operate responsibly and 
effectively, and fulfil its charter to achieve conservation and sustainable management of 
the global SBT fishery. 
 
Attachment C 
 
OPENING STATEMENT - NEW ZEALAND 
 
 
• 
The New Zealand delegation welcomed the opportunity to meet and work with the 
 
delegations from Australia and Japan, the staff of the Secretariat, and in particular, 
 
Mr Ishida, the Head of the Japanese delegations. In addition, we welcome 
 
representatives from Indonesia, the Republic of Korea and Taiwan. 
• 
In recent years, meetings of the Commission have been difficult and protracted 
 
affairs as the parties sought to reconcile differences in approach. To resolve these 
 
issues, the Commission parties will need to listen carefully to the perspective of the 
 
other parties, have an open mind and commit to co-operative work at this meeting. 
• 
The hope of the New Zealand delegation is that all parties will build on the 
 
working relationship and understanding developed in recent meetings to 
 
constructively progress a number of matters within the Commission. We have 
 
strong obligations to work with the Commission framework rather than letting it 
 
fail by default and transference of allegiance to an alternative management regime. 
• 
A key issue before the Commission is the securing of the accession or cooperation 
 
of non-parties. New Zealand remains extremely concerned about increasing SBT 
 
catch by Indonesia and the Republic of Korea. Non-party catches and their 
 
involvement in the Commission must be a high priority. The integrity and function 
 
of the Commission is compromised by the current situation. However, there are 
 
clear steps which the Commission can co-operatively take to address this situation. 
 
That is: 
 
1. 
finalise the communique which was developed at CCSBT4(1) and pass it to 
 
 
non-party representatives at this meeting; 
 
2. 
develop and commit to a plan for Commission representatives to undertake 
 
 
direct approaches to non-parties about accession or cooperation; and, 
 
3. 
finalise the negotiation brief or talking points which the Commission   
 
 
representatives will use in those direct approaches with non-parties. 
• 
New Zealand has the negotiation mandate to take all of these steps at this meeting.  
 
CERTIFICATION MANDATE?? In this respect, New Zealand is concerned that 
 
Japan has linked, inappropriately in our view, its cooperation in progressing of 
 
crucial non-party steps with New Zealand and Australia agreeing to an increase in 
 
catch available to Japan. Consequently, non-party actions agreed in principle at 
 
CCSBT4(1) have not progressed. 
• 
Our primary management objective must be an improved stock status. The 
 
scientists have agreed that the SBT parental biomass is severely depleted and there 
 
are risks to the security of future harvests. New Zealand is particularly concerned 
 
about prospects for stock recovery given that the observed incremental increase in 
 
juveniles is unlikely to contribute to the parental stock as a result of the high 
 
exploitation rate. We strongly advocate that the Commission critically examine 
 
both its ability and obligations to respond to the scientific differences that exist and 
 
the resulting uncertainty in the assessment. 
• 
Given the current status of the stock, New Zealand strongly advocates that the 
 
Commission take management action to ensure stock recovery. This can only be 
 
achieved through a reduction to overall SBT removals. That is, a reduction to catch 
 
by either non-parties or Commission parties. Given the lack of progress on non-
 
party issues to date, at this meeting, New Zealand will advocate that the 
 
Commission's TAC of 11 750 tonnes be reduce by 3 000 tonnes to 8 750 tonnes. 
 
New Zealand accepts that fishery assessments will always have a degree of 
 
uncertainty. The Commission needs to take management decisions in the face of 
 
uncertainty and the lack of consensus in the Scientific Committee. New Zealand 
 
strongly advocates that the Commission apply the precautionary approach in the 
 
consideration of setting a TAC. That is, the absence of adequate scientific 
 
information should not be used as a reason for postponing or failing to take 
 
conservation and management measures. 
• 
In recent years, the Commission has given consideration to experimental fishing.  
 
This consideration is dependent on output of collaborative scientific work to 
 
evaluate the risks and benefits associated with experimental fishing. A decision to 
 
whether to proceed with experimental fishing would be based on the outcome of 
 
that assessment. New Zealand fully supports the Scientific Committee continuing 
 
its work to address uncertainty in the assessment and more closely align the 
 
scientific approaches taken by respective parties. In principle, New Zealand 
 
remains open to an appropriately planned, designed and implemented experimental 
 
fishing programme. 
• 
The New Zealand delegation hopes to build on the working relations between the 
 
parties to resolve the matters before the Commission at this meeting. All parties 
 
have a strong obligation to work within the CCSBT rather than shifting allegiances 
 
to alternative management arrangements. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Attachment D 
 
AGENDA 
 
 
1. 
Opening of Meeting 
 
1.1 Welcoming Address 
 
1.2 Adoption of Agenda 
 
1.3 Appointment of Rapporteurs 
 
1.4 Meeting Arrangements 
 
2. 
Relationship with Non Members 
 
- 
Implementation of Article 15 of the Convention 
 
3. 
Relationship with IOTC 
 
4. 
Certification of Trade in Southern Bluefin Tuna 
 
5. 
Consideration of an Experimental Fishing Program 
 
6. 
Total Allowable Catch and Quota Allocation 
 
6.1 Total Allowable Catch 
 
6.2 National Allocations 
 
7. 
Program of Work for 1997-98 
 
8. 
Finance and Administration 
 
8.1 Data Management 
 
8.2 Costs of Meetings Outside Canberra 
 
8.3 Budget for 1998 
 
9. 
Other Business 
 
9.1 Selection of the CCSBT Documents to be Confidential 
 
9.2 Greenpeace Protest Campaign 
 
9.3 FAO Coordinating Working Party on Fishery Statistics 
 
9.4 Headquarters Agreement 
 
10. Close of the Meeting 
 
10.1 Election of Chair and Vice Chair for 1998 
 
10.2 Adoption of the Report of the Meeting 
 
10.3 Closure of the Meeting 
 
Attachment E 
 
List of Participants 
 
 
Chair 
 
Mr Royce ELLIOTT 
Ministry of Fisheries 
PO Box 1020 
Wellington 
New Zealand 
Phone: +64 4 470 2619 
Fax:  
+64 4 470 2669 
 
Australia 
 
Delegation  
 
Ms Mary HARWOOD 
(Head of Delegation) 
Assistant Secretary, Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Branch  
Petroleum and Fisheries Division 
DPIE 
GPO Box 858 
Canberra ACT 2601 
Phone: +61 2 6272 5044 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4215 
Email: 
mary.harwood@dpie.gov.au 
 
Mr Neil HERMES 
(Alternate) 
Director, International Section  
Fisheries and Aquaculture Branch 
DPIE 
GPO Box 858 
Canberra ACT 2601 
Phone: +61 2 6271 6396 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4215 
Email: 
neil.hermes@dpie.gov.au 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr Nick RAYNS 
(Alternate) 
Senior Manager, Tuna and Billfish 
Fisheries 
Australian Fisheries Management 
Authority 
PO Box 7051 
Canberra Mail Centre 
Canberra ACT 2610 
Phone: +61 2 6272 4812 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4614 
Email: 
nick.rayns@afma.gov.au 
 
Government Experts and Advisers 
 
Australian Fisheries Management 
Authority 
PO Box 7051 
Canberra Mail Centre 
Canberra ACT 2610 
 
Mr Peter NEAVE 
Senior Management Officer 
Western Tuna and Billfish Fishery 
Phone: +61 2 6272 5794 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4614 
Email: 
peter.neave@afma.gov.au 
 
Ms Joan LEARY 
Senior Management Officer 
SBT Fisheries 
Phone: +61 2 6272 4442 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4614 
Email: 
joan.leary@afma.gov.au 
 
Ms Colleen CROSS 
Management Officer 
SBT/Western Tuna and Billfish Fishery 
Phone: +61 2 6272 5286 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4614 
Email: 
colleen.cross@afma.gov.au 
 
 
Mr Matt GLEESON 
Senior Management Officer 
Compliance Programs 
Phone: +61 2 6272 5698 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4614 
Email: 
matt.gleeson@afma.gov.au 
 
Department of Primary Industries and 
Energy 
GPO Box 858 
Canberra ACT 2601 
 
Mr Jonathon BARRINGTON 
Assistant Director 
International Relations 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Branch 
Phone: +61 2 6271 6696 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4215 
Email: 
jonathon.barrington@dpie.gov.au 
 
Ms Cathy WALLACE 
Senior Policy Officer 
International Relations 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Branch  
Phone: +61 2 6272 3063 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4215 
Email: 
cathy.wallace@dpie.gov.au 
 
Ms Larissa ARNEY 
International Relations Section 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Branch 
Phone: +61 2 6272 6541 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4215 
Email: 
larissa.arney@dpie.gov.au 
 
Bureau of Resource Sciences 
Department of Primary Industries and 
Energy 
PO Box E11 
Kingston ACT 2604 
 
Dr Derek STAPLES 
Director 
Fisheries Resources Branch 
Phone: +61 2 6272 5177 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4014 
Email: 
djs@mailpc.brs.gov.au 
 
CSIRO 
CSIRO Division of Marine Research 
PO Box 1538 
Hobart TAS 7001 
 
Dr Tom POLACHECK 
Senior Research Scientist 
Tropical and Pelagic Ecosystems 
Program 
Phone: +61 3 6232 5312 
Fax:  
+61 3 6232 5199 
Email: 
tom.polacheck@marine.csiro.au 
 
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
RG Casey Building 
Barton ACT 0221 
 
Mr Andrew SERDY 
Sea Law and Ocean Policy Group 
The Legal Office 
Phone: +61 2 6261 3228 
Fax:  
+61 2 6261 2144 
Email: 
andrew.serdy@dfat.gov.au 
 
Mr Brian SLEE 
Sea Law and Ocean Policy Group 
The Legal Office 
 
Attorney-General's Department 
Robert Garran Offices 
Barton ACT 0221 
 
Mr Mark ZANKER 
International Trade Law Section 
International Law Office 
Phone: +61 2 6250 6647 
 
Mr Andrea MASTROMATTEO 
International Trade Law Section 
International Law Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environment Australia 
Biodiversity Group 
GPO Box 636 
Canberra ACT 2601 
 
Portfolio Marine Group 
GPO Box 787 
Canberra ACT 2601 
 
Mr Andrew McNEE 
Director 
Wildlife and Marine Management 
Section 
Biodiversity Group 
Phone: +61 2 6250 0317 
Fax:  
+61 2 6250 0314 
Email: 
andrew.mcnee@dest.gov.au 
 
Mr Barry BAKER 
Assistant Director 
Wildlife and Marine Management 
Section 
Biodiversity Group 
Phone: +61 2 6250 9402 
Fax:  
+61 2 6250 9455 
Email: 
barry.baker@dest.gov.au 
 
Mr Steve MERCER 
Environmental Protection Group 
 
Ms Collette BARTON 
Environmental Protection Group 
 
Mr Steve BOLTON 
Portfolio Marine Group 
 
Mr Neil HUGHES 
Portfolio Marine Group 
Phone: +61 2 6274 1088 
Fax:  
+61 2 7274 1006 
Email: 
nhughes@dest.gov.au 
 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and 
Resource Economics 
 
Mr Matt STUBBS 
Phone: +61 2 6272 2362 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 2328 
 
Department of Finance 
 
Mr Mark McGOVERN 
Phone: +61 2 6263 2523 
Fax:  
+61 2 6263 2147 
 
Non-government Experts and Advisers 
 
Tuna Boat Owners Association of 
Australia 
PO Box 416 
Fullarton SA 5063 
Phone: +61 8 8373 2507 
Fax:  
+61 8 8373 2508 
Email: 
tuna-b-j@camtech.net.au 
 
Mr Brian JEFFRIESS 
President 
 
TRAFFIC Oceania 
GPO Box 528 
Sydney NSW 2001 
 
Mr Glenn SANT 
Senior Research Officer 
Phone: +61 2 9299 6582 
Fax:  
+61 2 9299 6557 
Email: 
traffico@msn.com 
 
Japan 
 
Delegation  
 
Mr Shuji Ishida 
(Head of Delegation) 
Councillor 
Fisheries Policy Planning Department 
Fisheries Agency 
1-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100 
Phone: +81 3 3504 8111 
Fax:  
+81 3 3504 2649 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr Masayuki KOMATSU 
Director for International Negotiations 
International Affairs Division 
Fisheries Policy Planning Department 
Fisheries Agency 
1-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100 
Phone: +81 3 3591 1086 
Fax:  
+81 3 3504 2649 
 
Mr Kenji KAGAWA 
Deputy Director 
Far Seas Fisheries Division 
Resources Management Department 
Fisheries Agency 
1-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100 
Phone: +81 3 3502 2443 
Fax:  
+81 3 3591 5824 
Email: 
kenji_kagawa@nm.maff.go.jp 
 
Mr Joji MORISHITA 
Deputy Director 
International Affairs Division 
Fisheries Policy Planning Department 
Fisheries Agency 
1-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100 
Phone: +81 3 3591 1086 
Fax:  
+81 3 3504 2649 
Email: 
KYN06115@niftyserve.or.jp 
 
Mr Hideaki OKADA 
International Affairs Division 
Fisheries Policy Planning Department 
Fisheries Agency 
1-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100 
Phone: +81 3 3591 1086 
Fax:  
+81 3 3504 2649 
Email: 
hideaki_okada@nm.maff.go.jp 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr Sachiko TSUJI 
Section Chief 
Temperate Tuna Research Group 
National Research Institute of Far Seas 
Fisheries 
5-7-1 Orido, Shimizu 
Shizuoka 424-8633 
Phone: +81 543 36 6042 
Fax:  
+81 543 35 9642 
Email: 
tsuji@enyo.affrc.go.jp 
 
Ms Naoko HAMAGUCHI 
Fishery Division 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
2-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100 
Phone: +81 3 3581 1783 
Fax:  
+81 3 3503 3136 
Email: 
naoko.uchida@mofa.go.jp 
 
Mr Kenro IINO 
Counsellor 
Embassy of Japan 
112 Empire Circuit 
Yarralumla ACT 2600 
Australia 
Phone: +61 2 6273 3244 
Fax:  
+61 2 6273 1848 
 
Mr Michio IIDA 
Counsellor 
Embassy of Japan 
112 Empire Circuit 
Yarralumla ACT 2600 
Australia 
Phone: +61 2 6273 3244 
Fax:  
+61 2 6273 1848 
 
Advisers to the Delegation 
 
Federation of Japan Tuna Fisheries 
Cooperative Associations 
3-22 Kudankita 2-chome, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 102 
Phone: +81 3 3264 6167 
Fax:  
+81 3 3234 7455 
 
 
Mr Tsutomu WATANABE 
Managing Director 
 
Mr Hideetsu IKUTA 
Advisor 
 
Mr Shinroku SASAKI 
Advisor 
 
Mr Yoshikatsu HATAKEYAMA 
Advisor 
 
Mr Toshiaki KONNO 
Advisor 
 
Mr Kaneji NISHIKAWA 
Advisor 
 
Mr Hiroshi HANEDA 
Advisor 
 
Mr Yuji KAWAI 
Manager, International Department 
 
Mr Sen MARUYAMA 
Section Chief, International Department 
 
Mr Nozomu MIURA 
International Department 
 
National Ocean Tuna Fishery Association 
1-1-12 Uchikanda Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 101 
Phone: +81 3 3294 9611 
Fax:  
+81 3 3294 9615 
 
Mr Toshiaki KANAZAWA 
Advisor 
 
Mr Hiroaki YAMAMOTO 
Advisor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Zealand 
 
Mr Mark EDWARDS 
(Head of Delegation) 
Policy Manager 
Ministry of Fisheries 
PO Box 1020 
Wellington 
Phone: +64 4 470 2619 
Fax:  
+64 4 470 2669 
Email: 
edwardsm@fish.govt.nz 
 
Ms Lee ROBINSON 
Policy Analyst 
Ministry of Fisheries 
PO Box 1020 
Wellington 
Phone: +64 4 470 2667 
Fax:  
+64 4 470 2669 
Email: 
robinsol@fish.govt.nz 
 
Dr Talbot MURRAY 
Pelagic Project Leader 
National Institute of Water & Atmospheric 
Research Ltd 
PO Box 14-901 
Kilbirnie, Wellington 
Phone: +64 4 386 0300 
Fax:  
+64 4 386 0574 
Email: 
t.murray@niwa.cri.nz 
 
Ms Lisa FUTSCHEK 
Negotiator 
Trade Negotiations Division 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
Private Bag 18 901 
Wellington 
Phone: +64 4 494 8366 
Fax:  
+64 4 494 8518 
 
Mr Charles HUFFLETT 
Solander Group Ltd 
PO Box 555 
Nelson 
Phone: +64 3 548 1446 
Fax:  
+64 3 548 7256 
Email: 
Huff@solander.co.nz 
 
Republic of Indonesia Observers 
 
Embassy of the Republic of Indonesia 
8 Darwin Avenue 
Canberra ACT 2600 
Australia 
Phone: +61 2 6250 8600 
Fax:  
+61 2 6273 3545 
 
Mr Indratno SISWOYO 
Minister Counsellor 
Economic Section 
 
Mr Deny KURNIA 
Second Secretary 
Economic Section 
 
Republic of Korea Observers 
 
Embassy of the Republic of Korea 
113 Empire Circuit 
Yarralumla ACT 2600 
Australia 
Phone: +61 2 6273 3044 
Fax:  
+61 2 6273 4839 
 
Mr Ji-Bong SONG 
First Secretary 
 
Taiwan Observers 
 
Taipei Economic and Cultural Office 
Unit 8, Tourism House 
40 Blackall Street 
Barton ACT 2600 
Australia 
Phone: +61 2 6273 3344 
Fax:  
+61 2 6273 3228 
Email: 
ecotecocanberra@netinfo.com.au 
 
Mr Henry YANG 
Director 
Economic Division 
 
Ms Fang-Jou LIN 
Assistant 
Economic Division 
 
CCSBT Secretariat 
 
PO Box 37 
Deakin West ACT 2600 
Australia 
Phone:  +61 2 6282 8396 
Fax:  
+61 2 6282 8407 
 
Mr Campbell McGREGOR 
Executive Secretary 
Email: cmcgregor@ccsbt.org.au 
 
Mr Akihiro MAE 
Deputy Executive Secretary 
Email: amae@ccsbt.org.au 
 
Ms Kozue LOGHEM 
Administrative Officer 
Email: kloghem@ccsbt.org.au 
 
Interpreters 
 
Ms Saemi BABA 
 
Ms Kumi KOIKE 
 
Attachment F 
 
ACTION PLAN CONCERNING PROMOTION OF ACCESSION TO, AND 
COOPERATION WITH, CCSBT BY NON-MEMBER STATES AND ENTITIES 
 
 
The Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna (hereinafter referred to 
as the Commission), 
 
RECALLING Article 64 of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 
(UNCLOS) which provides that the coastal State and other States whose nationals fish 
in the region for the highly migratory species shall cooperate directly or through 
appropriate international organisations with a view to ensuring the conservation and 
promoting the objective of optimum utilisation of such species throughout the region, 
both within and beyond the exclusive economic zone; 
 
ALSO RECALLING Article 8 of the United Nations Agreement for the Implementation 
of the Provisions of the UNCLOS of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation 
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (UNIA), 
which provides that, in circumstances where a subregional or regional fisheries 
management organisation or arrangement has the competence to establish conservation 
and management measures for particular straddling fish stocks or highly migratory fish 
stocks, only those States which are members of such an organisation or participants in 
such an arrangement, or which agree to apply the conservation and management 
measures established by such organisation or arrangement, shall have access to the 
fishery resources to which those measures apply; 
 
FURTHER RECALLING Article 17 of the UNIA which provides that a State which is 
not a member of such an organisation or participant in such an arrangement and which 
does not otherwise agree to apply the conservation and management measures 
established by such an organisation or arrangement shall not authorise vessels flying its 
flag to engage in fishing operations for the specific straddling fish stocks or highly 
migratory fish stocks which are subject to the conservation and management measures 
established by such organisation or arrangement; 
 
MINDFUL of Article 5 of the Convention for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin 
Tuna (hereafter referred to as the Convention), which provides that Each Party of the 
Convention shall take all actions necessary to ensure the compliance with the binding 
measures for the conservation and management of southern bluefin tuna (SBT); 
 
NOTING the necessity of efforts by the Parties to encourage Non-members to also 
constrain their catch and to reduce their fishing pressure on the SBT stock; 
 
ACKNOWLEDGING the past and present efforts of the Parties to rebuild the SBT 
stock by substantially reducing quota levels since 1989 up to the present, resulting in 
hardship for their nationals in adapting their operations to the reduced catch levels; 
  
ALSO ACKNOWLEDGING the intention by the Parties to address problems of over 
capacity in the SBT fishery; 
 
CONCERNED that the catch of SBT by nationals, residents or vessels of some States or 
entities not party to the CCSBT (hereinafter referred to as Non-members) has been 
significantly and rapidly increasing in recent years, undermining the attainment of the 
objective of the Convention; 
 
RECALLING Article 15 of the Convention which prescribes a series of actions to be 
taken by the Parties to discourage fishing activities for SBT by nationals, residents or 
vessels of Non-members; 
 
AWARE that no substantive progress has been made in the issue of Non-member 
fishing activities despite the Parties' repeated requests to Non-members which are 
currently fishing for SBT to restrain their catches, respect the objectives of the 
Convention and to accede the Convention or to decide to apply its conservation and 
management measures; 
 
HAS DECIDED UPON the following Action Plan 
 
1.  The Commission renews its calls on Non-members fishing for SBT to honour their 
international obligations to cooperate in the conservation and management of SBT, to 
respect the competence of the Commission, and to 
 
a)  accede to the Convention or decide to apply the conservation and management 
 
measures currently adopted by the Commission with regard to southern bluefin 
 
tuna; and 
 
b)  collect more comprehensive and accurate data concerning the fisheries for southern 
 
bluefin tuna by their nationals, residents and vessels, to verify such data and to 
 
provide them to the Commission. 
 
2.  Having considered the low level of parental biomass and the need to rebuild the 
SBT stock, but acknowledging that a reasonable but limited allowance should be made 
for Non-members fishing for SBT, the Commission has determined that no more than 
2550 mt of SBT should be taken in total by Non-members which accede to the 
Convention or decide to apply the Commission's conservation and management 
measures. The Commission notes the strong obligation for Non-members to accede 
immediately, but until such time as they accede to the Convention or decide to apply its 
conservation and management measures, the Commission considers that the only 
responsible action for Non-members to take is to substantially reduce their catch of SBT 
to ensure that their cumulative catches of SBT do not exceed 2550 mt and to implement 
voluntarily other conservation and management measures decided upon or 
recommended by the Commission. 
 
3.  The Commission will consider a scheme to collect more accurate and 
comprehensive information on SBT fishing through trade, with a view to evaluating and 
designing such a scheme. A special working group for this purpose will be established. 
 
4.  The Commission will periodically review the effectiveness of conservation and 
management measures of the Commission, based on catch data compiled by the CCSBT, 
national statistics, trade information and other relevant information obtained at ports 
and at the fishing grounds. If the effectiveness of CCSBT conservation and management 
measures is being undermined by the fishing activities of particular Non-members, the 
Commission will immediately take appropriate further measures in accordance with 
international law, to ensure the effectiveness of conservation and management measures 
of the CCSBT. 
 
5.  The parties will adopt appropriate measures in accordance with Article 15.2 and 
Article 15.3 of the Convention within the limit of their authority. These measures will 
include, but are not limited to, measures to discourage their nationals from engaging in 
or cooperating with Non-member fishing activities for SBT, ie on board fishing vessels 
registered in Non-members, as fishing master, vessel operation supervisor, or crew. 
 
Attachment G 
 
Programme for Approaches to Non-Parties 
 
 
ACTION 
DATES 
Complete communique and distribute to non-parties at CCSBT4(2) 
CCSBT4(2) 
Schedule dates for direct approaches by Commission representatives 
to non-parties. 
CCSBT4(2) 
Develop and agree to talking points for direct approaches including 
elements such as the international obligations of non-parties and 
quota allocation for non-parties 
CCSBT4(2) 
Finalise and send letters to non-parties from the Chair of the 
Commission. These will include a copy of the communique, and will 
advise that the Commission has developed a programme for direct 
approaches to non-parties to discuss non-party accession or 
cooperation and advise that a further letter will be forwarded to 
confirm dates for a visit by Commission representatives. 
CCSBT4(2) 
Japan and Australia to respond to New Zealand's paper suggesting the 
use of an "Arrangement" or Memorandum of Understanding as the 
instrument to formalise cooperation with Chinese Taipei. 
10 February 
1998 
Commission to confirm the form of the instrument it wishes to use to 
cooperate with Chinese Taipei. 
During 1998 
Commission delegation, compromising at least one senior 
representative from each of the three Commission parties, to visit 
Seoul, Taipei and Jakarta to discuss non-party accession or 
cooperation 
March-April 
1998 (?)  
(Japan to 
confirm 
availability 
ASAP) 
Commission to consider, either intersessionally, or by way of member 
representatives, the responses of non-parties to the first approach by 
the Commission delegation. 
Following 
direct 
Approaches 
 
 
 
21 January 1998 
 
Attachment H 
 
Peer Review of Scientific Committee's Stock Assessment Process 
 
 
Proposal  
 
The Scientific Committee's advice is based on valid, high quality scientific analyses 
taking into account all available data. However, at recent Scientific Committee meetings, 
there has been a lack of consensus on the estimates of the probability of recovery of the 
SBT stock. The Commission is concerned about this and decided to undertake a peer 
review of the scientific stock assessment process by a panel of experts. This should be 
done as a matter of urgency given the current difficulties. 
 
The need for such peer review was recognised at the Scientific Process Workshop where 
it was agreed that "there will be a quality assurance program for the scientific process, 
including periodic external review". 
 
Parameters for the Review 
 
The following parameters will form the basis for planning and implementation of a 
review of the Scientific Committee's assessment process: 
 
1) 
The terms of references are:  
 
 
A. To provide a review on: 
 
 
 
 
- existing data used in stock assessment; 
 
 
 
 
- availability and necessity of data to be used in the stock  
 
 
 
 
 
assessment; 
 
 
 
 
- hypotheses and structure of assessment model; 
 
 
 
 
- quality and appropriateness of tuning indices; 
 
 
 
 
- method and hypotheses to standardise indices; 
 
 
 
 
- biological parameters used in assessment; 
 
 
 
 
- sets of weightings assigned to uncertainties; 
 
 
 
 
- hypotheses and structure of models used in projection; 
 
 
 
 
- methods treating uncertainties in models; 
 
 
 
 
- process to evaluate calculation and computer codes; 
 
 
 
 
- process to incorporate new techniques and/or new information; 
 
 
 
 
- process to review newly incorporated information; and 
 
 
 
 
- quality and format of the Report to the Commission. 
 
 
 
B. To advise the Commission and Scientific Committee on improvements 
 
 
 
that could be made to the scientific analyses and stock assessment  
 
 
 
processes.  
 
2) The review is to be carried out by 3 scientists, chosen by consensus, with extensive 
experience in stock assessments and population dynamics on fisheries 
 resources, no less than two of whom have had no prior involvement in the CCSBT 
 Scientific Committee process. One of the scientists can have been involved in the 
 CCSBT Scientific Committee Process. 
 
3) 
The review is to be conducted over a four week period coinciding with the 
 
Stock  Assessment Group and Scientific Committee meetings, including time for 
 
preparing and writing their report. 
 
4) 
The review panel will attend the Stock Assessment Group and Scientific 
 
Committee meetings. 
 
5) 
The review panel should provide a report to the Secretariat for distribution to the 
 
parties by August 17, 1998. 
 
The review should provide an independent report to the Commission on assessing the 
quality of the scientific analyses and methods being used by the SC. It is critical that 
any such review be independent. It is not meant to provide a stock assessment but a way 
forward to achieve a greater level of consensus. No one individual scientist can act as an 
external expert to the Stock Assessment Group or the Scientific Committee and take 
part in the peer review panel in 1998. 
 
Attachment I 
 
Import Statistics of SBT by Japan 
 
 
 
Japanese Import of SBT by Country/Area (Fresh, Chilled and Frozen) 
 
Source: Japan Trade Statistics, Ministry of Finance 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Country/ 
    1995 
    1996 
    1997 
 % against 
 
   Area  
      
 
      
 
  Jan-Nov 
     1996 
 
 
 
      kg  
      kg  
      kg       
   Jan-Nov 
 
 
Australia 
3,272,990 
3,195,903 
6,104,489 
   209.2 
Taiwan 
1,276,474 
1,396,915 
   401,254 
     32.1 
Korea  
     75,836 
   562,573 
   458,305 
   207.8 
Indonesia 
   207,758 
   317,687 
   288,849 
   104.0 
Honduras 
   146,574 
   179,918 
     54,499 
   116.6 
New Zealand    202,636 
   128,249 
     87,425 
     68.4 
Singapore 
       1,968 
     43,835 
     13,945 
     35.5 
Vanuatu 
 
 
     17,855 
France  
 
 
       2,995 
Belize  
       3,380 
       9,534 
Palau  
 
 
          569 
 
315 
     55.4 
Guam  
 
 
          680 
 
304 
     44.7 
Philippines 
 
 
          182 
Cook Islands  
 
          140 
Chile  
 
 
          334 
Uruguay 
          342 
          102 
       1,028 
1,007.8 
Thailand 
 
 
          333 
USA  
       1,320 
China  
       9,183 
Spain  
     11,061 
Tunisia 
          124 
Fiji 
 
          445 
 
 
            96 
Tonga  
          138 
Portugal 
 
 
 
 
            93 
New Caledonia 
 
 
 
          119 
 
Maldives 
 
 
 
 
          163 
 
Panama 
 
 
 
 
   212,632 
 
F.S. of Micronesia 
 
 
 
          195 
 
 
 
Total  
5,210,229 
5,857,804 
7,623,711 
    155.8 
 
 
Attachment J 
 
CCSBT 
WORK PROGRAM FOR 1997/98 
 
 
ITEM 
DATE/TIMING 
PLACE 
Target date for resolution of 
implementation and 
computational differences 
wrt Step 1 and Step 2. 
1 March 1998 
 
Scientists' meeting to 
discuss 1998 stock 
assessment process 
2 days in April 1998 
Japan 
Exchange of catch effort & 
size data 
28 April 1998 
NA 
Exchange catch-at-age and 
non-parties catch and age 
composition 
5 May 1998 
NA 
Management Strategy 
Workshop 
3-5 June 1998 
Australia 
ERS Working Group Third 
Meeting 
9-12 or 10-13 Jun 1998  
to be confirmed by Japan 
Japan 
Exchange standardised 
CPUE 
9 June 1998 
NA 
Trade Information Scheme 
Workshop 
June/July 1998 
(30 June-2 July 1998) 
Japan 
Stock Assessment Group 
meeting 
23-31 July 1998 
Japan 
CCSBT Scientific 
Committee 
3-6 August 1998 
Japan 
Peer Review of Scientific 
Assessment Process 
July - August 1998  
Report by 17 August 1998 
 
Compliance Committee 
14 September 1998 
Japan 
CCSBT Fifth Annual 
Meeting 
14-18 September 1998 
Japan 
 
Attachment K
     COMMISSION FOR THE CONSERVATION OF SOUTHERN BLUEFIN TUNA
                                               BUDGET - 1998
1997
1998
    INCOME 
Carry over from Previous Year
45,000
         
  Contributions from members
247,314
         
    Japan            
247,314
           
221,763
         
    Australia         
221,763
           
67,023
           
    New Zealand      
67,023
             
536,100
       
25,000
           
    Reserve funds from 1996
N/A
13,000
           
    Staff Assessment Levy
35,000
             
15,000
           
    Interest on investments
12,200
             
47,200
         
589,100
         
    TOTAL GROSS INCOME
628,300
       
    EXPENDITURE
            N/A
Resumed Fourth Annual Meeting
28,000
         
    ANNUAL COMMISSION MEETING - (Meeting  CCSBT 5 1998)
13,000
           
    Interpretation Costs
19,000
             
3,000
             
    Hire of venue
5,000
               
3,000
             
    Hire of Equipment
4,000
               
1,000
             
    Miscellaneous Costs
1,000
               
8,000
             
   Publication and Translation
8,000
               
28,000
           
37,000
         
    SPECIAL COMMISSION MEETINGS
32,000
           
    Hire of venue, interpretation and other support
34,000
         
23,000
           
    Additional Sub committees / workshops
35,000
         
    SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE
22,000
           
    Interpretation Costs
21,000
             
5,500
             
    Hire of venue
5,500
               
5,300
             
    Hire of equipment
4,000
               
18,000
           
    Hire of Consultants
15,000
             
2,100
             
    Miscellaneous Costs
1,000
               
1,200
             
    Publication and translation
5,000
               
54,100
           
51,500
         
    SECRETARIAT COSTS
185,000
         
    Secretariat Staff Costs
220,000
           
35,000
           
    Staff Assessment Levy
45,000
             
20,000
           
    Temporary Staff or Consultants
N/A
35,000
           
    Employer Super/Social security
36,000
             
6,000
             
    Worker's Compensation/ travel/contents Insurance
5,000
               
10,000
           
    Travel/transport   - O/seas and domestic
38,000
             
10,000
           
    Miscellaneous Translation of Commission and Committee
15,000
             
1,000
             
    Training
2,000
               
    Annual provision for overseas appointee - home leave
28,000
           
    allowance, repatriation grant and removal costs
5,000
               
330,000
         
366,000
       
   OFFICE  MANAGEMENT COSTS
30,000
           
    Office lease
31,000
             
16,000
           
    Office running costs               
16,800
             
15,000
           
    Provision for new/replacement assets
10,000
             
6,000
             
    Telephone/communications
7,000
               
10,000
           
    Miscellaneous
12,000
             
77,000
           
76,800
         
45,000
           
    Carry forward to following year
589,100
         
    GROSS EXPENDITURE
628,300
       
Attachment L 
 
Suggested text of reply 
 
 
The Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna presents its 
compliments to the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and has the honour to 
acknowledge the Department's Note Nº ALA 97/1087 of 20 January 1998 which reads 
as follows: 
 
"The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade presents its compliments to the 
Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna and has the honour to refer 
to the Headquarters Agreement between the Government of Australia and the 
Commission, done at Canberra on 20 January 1998. 
 
The Department draws the Commission's attention to Article 20 of the above 
Agreement, in both paragraphs of which reference is made to the Migration Act 1958 
and the Migration Regulations 1994. As Acts of Parliament and more particularly 
regulations made pursuant to such Acts are by their nature subject to repeal and 
replacement by new legislation at unpredictable intervals, the Department has the 
further honour to propose that the parties to the Agreement interpret the references in 
Article 20 to the Migration Act 1958 and the Migration Regulations 1994 as references 
to Australia's migration laws as in force from time to time. 
 
In the event of this proposal being acceptable to the Commission, this Note together 
with the Commission's Note accepting the proposal will constitute an understanding 
between the Government of Australia and the Commission as to the interpretation of 
Article 20 of the Agreement, with effect from the date of the Commission's Note." 
 
The Commission has the honour to confirm that the proposal outlined in the 
Department's Note is acceptable to the Commission and agrees with the suggestion that 
the Department's Note and this present reply should be regarded as constituting an 
understanding between the Government of Australia and the Commission as to the 
interpretation of Article 20 of the Agreement, with effect from the date of this reply. 
 
The Commission for the Conservation of Southern BluefinTuna avails itself of this 
opportunity to renew to the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade the assurances of 
its highest consideration. 
 
 
 
 
 
Campbell McGregor 
Executive Secretary 
 
