Commission for the Conservation of 
Southern Bluefin Tuna 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the Resumed Third Annual Meeting 
(Revised) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 – 22 February 1997 
Canberra, Australia 
 
 
 
1
Report of the Resumed Third Annual Meeting 
18 - 22 February 1997 
Canberra, Australia 
 
 
The representatives of the Governments of Japan, Australia and New Zealand 
reconvened the Third Annual Meeting of the Commission for the Conservation of 
Southern Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT) from 18 to 22 February 1997. This meeting was a 
resumption of the Third Annual Meeting, the first part of which was held from 24 to 28 
September 1996. 
 
The meeting was chaired by Dr Alison Turner (Australia). 
 
Agenda Item 1: 
Opening of Meeting 
 
1.1 & 1.2  
Welcoming Address and Meeting Arrangements 
 
The Chair welcomed delegates and the observers from the Republic of Korea and 
Taiwan. 
 
Mr Morishita from Japan represented the International Commission for the 
Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) and Mr Edwards from New Zealand 
represented the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
(CCAMLR). 
 
1.3 Appointment of Rapporteurs 
 
Rapporteurs were appointed as follows: for Japan, Messrs Komatsu and Morishita, for 
New Zealand, Ms Robinson and Ms Futschek, and for Australia, Messrs Cassells and 
Pigounis. 
 
1.4 Adoption of Agenda 
 
The agreed agenda and list of participants for the meeting are at Attachments A and B, 
respectively. 
 
1.5 Member's Reports 
 
Japan 
 
Mr. Morimoto, head of the Japanese Delegation, explained Japan's basic positions on 
the following five important issues to be discussed at this resumed meeting: 
 
 
Total Allowable Catch and National Allocations 
 
Japan confirmed that its proposal, from the first part of the Third Annual meeting, of 
increasing the Total Allowable Catch (TAC) by 3,000 tonnes or more was still valid 
because a revised Japanese Virtual Population Analysis (VPA), which was circulated 
 
2
among the Members of the CCSBT prior to this meeting, had produced results to 
support the proposal. Japan believed that the resolution of the TAC at this meeting is 
very important, considering the abnormal situation where Australia and New Zealand 
had commenced their fishing operations without the settlement of a 1996/97 TAC. 
 
 
Joint Pilot Plan for Experimental Fishing Program 
 
Prior to this meeting, Japan had circulated a substantially revised Joint Pilot Plan. Major 
points of revision, which in Japan's view had accommodated the comments from 
Australia and New Zealand, are: 
a) 
to clarify the objective of a full scale Experimental Fishing Program (EFP) as 
 
examination of catch per unit effort (CPUE) hypothesis; 
b) 
to clarify the objective of the Joint Pilot Plan as examination of methods of vessel 
 
deployment to research areas; 
c) 
to revise the research period; 
d) 
to include specific catch figures and vessel numbers necessary for the Joint Pilot 
 
Plan; and 
e) 
to reaffirm a payback scheme of catch quota in case the Plan produces clear and 
 
substantial negative effects on the recovery rates of southern bluefin tuna (SBT). 
 
Japan emphasised that it was extremely difficult to come to an agreement on stock 
assessments without resolving uncertainties by experimental fishing and expressed its 
hopes for progress on the issues of the Joint Pilot Plan. 
 
 
Relationship with Non Parties 
 
Japan expressed serious concerns on the recent and rapid increase of SBT catch by 
non-parties. Japan urged the CCSBT to establish clear and specific action plans to 
strengthen measures toward non-parties. 
 
 
Seabirds 
 
Japan did not support arguments which blamed longline fisheries as the only cause of 
the reduction of some seabird populations. However, it recognised the necessity of 
addressing the conservation of seabirds and the need for longline fisheries to take some 
responsibility. Japan expressed its willingness to discuss specific seabird conservation 
steps at this meeting. 
 
 
Compliance Issue 
 
With regard to an incident that Japanese fishing vessels were found to be fishing 
illegally for SBT after the closure of fishing season by Japanese domestic regulations, 
Japan expressed its regrets and explained the results of investigation and measures taken. 
Japan maintained that strict enforcement actions had been taken and similar incidents 
would not occur again in the future. 
 
 
 
 
3
New Zealand 
 
New Zealand indicated it had a number of comments in response to Japan's statement 
but preferred to defer to the appropriate agenda items. 
 
Australia 
 
Australia underlined that the issue of TAC resolution was crucially important, and 
stressed that it considered it inappropriate for a unilaterally revised VPA to be raised at 
this resumed Meeting. Non-resolution of the TAC for 1996/97 had placed Australia in a 
very difficult position with respect to its domestic season, but nevertheless Australia had 
given a clear commitment to abide by existing quota levels. 
 
Australia commented that there were compelling issues arising from the incident 
involving illegal fishing by at least 40 Japanese vessels in December 1996. 
 
Although Japan had done new work on a possible pilot program, Australia nevertheless 
wished to restate its strong concerns regarding the matter of experimental fishing, which 
related to risks to the stock, adequacy of design, the management framework and 
monitoring systems. 
 
1.6 Secretariat's Report 
 
The Executive Secretary presented a report on progress in implementing the decisions 
of the first session of the Third Annual meeting of the CCSBT and other major tasks 
being undertaken by the Secretariat (Attachment C). 
 
The Chair proposed a process to complete the selection of the Commission's logo.  
This consultative process was completed and the Commission agreed to adopt the logo 
recommended by the Chair (Attachment D). 
 
The Commission agreed to amend the record of the first session of the Third Annual 
meeting relating to Agenda Item 5.4.2, by replacing the words "reaching 650 tonnes in 
1995", with "reaching 650 tonnes by September 1996". 
 
Agenda Item 2: 
Compliance Issues 
 
Japan reported that 40 Japanese fishing vessels were found to be operating after the 
closure of the SBT fishing season, which had been closed on 1 December 1996 under its 
domestic regulations, and expressed great regrets about the incident. After the 
identification of vessels involved and investigations to confirm the violation, the 
Fisheries Agency immediately took the following enforcement and preventive 
measures: 
a) 
ordered all the vessels involved to return to ports for further investigation by 1 
 
March 1997; 
b) 
imposed port detention of at least 65 days on some of those vessels confirmed to 
 
have been involved in the incident; 
c) 
ordered the vessels on their way back to ports to report their locations daily by GPS 
 
4
 
or INMARSAT, and for those without GPS or INMARSAT, to report by fax; 
d) 
dispatched its patrol vessel to the Indian Ocean fishing ground for the purpose of 
 
prevention and monitoring; 
e) 
imposed mandatory location reporting requirements on vessels intending to fish in 
 
the SBT fishing area; and 
f) 
strengthened patrol activities by enforcement vessels. 
 
Japan reported that this incident had led to the overcatch of its national allocation by 
308 tonnes and would therefore voluntarily reduce its 1997/98 national allocation by 
this amount. 
 
Australia reported that the aerial surveillance operation had been conducted to 
investigate Japan's claims that non-Members were moving into high seas SBT fishing 
grounds as soon as fishing by Japanese vessels had ceased. Instead the operation 
revealed at least 40 Japanese vessels operating in contravention of Japan's domestic 
regulations and in close proximity with vessels from the Republic of Korea. 
 
New Zealand and Australia noted that the recent events suggested Japan's compliance 
regime was inadequate despite Japan's recent efforts to improve its compliance regime.  
The resulting loss in confidence in Japan's monitoring system severely compromised the 
integrity of the Commission's management arrangements overall. This was a significant 
issue as the Commission is almost totally reliant on information from commercial 
fishers to assess the stock. Both countries drew attention to the responsibilities of Japan 
as flag state for compliance as described in the Agreement for the Implementation of the 
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and 
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (UNIA) to which all Members are now signatories and 
which further requires cooperation in enforcement and compliance. New Zealand 
outlined the components of an effective compliance regime and the need for confidence 
in the standards of the systems applied, ie vessel registration, permitting, catch/effort 
returns, observer coverage, landing and boarding inspections, air and sea surveillance, 
control of fish receivers, transhipments and legislation covering offences and penalties. 
 
New Zealand and Australia welcomed the Japanese proposal to subtract the overcatch 
from its 1997/98 quota as a responsible action. 
 
Both Australia and New Zealand stated their legitimate interest in the incident, because 
it contravened the terms of the Convention for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin 
Tuna. 
 
Other concerns raised by both Australia and New Zealand included the absence of an 
effective vessel monitoring system (VMS) system, false position reports by Japanese 
vessels applying for Australian port entry permits and non-Member vessels (Korean) 
fishing in company (and apparent close cooperation) with the offending Japanese 
vessels. In Australia's opinion, this development completely undermined any suggestion 
(which had often been made in the past) that the presence of Japanese vessels on the 
fishing grounds beyond their season might act as a deterrent to fishing by non-Member 
vessels.  
 
5
 
It was also noted that there remained the unresolved question of more than 10 other 
vessels which had appeared on Australian surveillance radar but for which photographs 
had not been possible. It was noted that the catch of these vessels had not been 
incorporated in the total over-catch estimate for the Japanese fleet. An additional 
concern was the implications of the illegal activity for the fishery stock assessment, i.e. 
how to incorporate the catch and effort information resulting from the incident (and 
from other possible undetected illegal fishing in previous seasons). 
 
On a forward-looking note, Australia and New Zealand made the point that this incident 
highlighted the great benefit which undoubtedly lay in having close cooperation 
between all Members on compliance issues. The incident particularly underlined the 
need for the Members to act quickly to establish the CCSBT Compliance Committee, 
and to work on implementing measures such as properly functioning VMS and vessel 
registers. 
 
Agenda Item 3: 
Proposal to Implement a Pilot Program on Experimental Fishing 
 
Japan presented a revised Joint Pilot Plan (JPP) for the Experimental Fishing Program 
(EFP) for SBT, which Japan felt accommodated the comments received from Australia 
and New Zealand. Japan explained major features and points of revisions of the JPP, 
including its purpose, methods of vessel deployment, research area, period, data 
handling, calculation bases for catch amount and the number of vessels required for 
implementation. 
 
Japan maintained that uncertainty regarding CPUE hypotheses was one of the major 
uncertainties in the SBT stock assessment and they felt EFP was acknowledged as an 
effective tool in reducing the CPUE uncertainty, thereby contributing to substantial 
progress in VPA analysis. It therefore urged the Commission to discuss the proposal in a 
constructive manner. 
 
Both Australia and New Zealand noted that there were a number of technical concerns 
with the proposal which had been devised and designed in a unilateral way by Japan.  
Their concerns were entirely consistent over the past two years, namely that while Japan 
had done a lot of work relating to Step 3, Steps 1 and 2 remained incomplete. By 
completing Steps 1 and 2, the parties could gain a much clearer picture of numerous 
important matters, including: 
a) 
uncertainty (including developing a common view of the various sources of 
 
uncertainty, the range of uncertainty and the appropriate weighting scheme); 
b) 
the risks inherent in any additional removals from the stock; 
c) 
key areas of uncertainty for which resolutions might be helpful to the parties in 
 
their management of the stock; and 
d) 
which key areas of uncertainty were likely to be resolved effectively by a program 
 
of experimental fishing. 
 
Japan responded that it had made its best efforts to obtain the cooperation of other 
members by exchanging comments and responses and proposing a workshop to discuss 
the JPP. 
 
6
 
Japan was of the opinion that Step 1 had been already completed and Step 2 was 
intended for the full scale EFP, not for the implementation of the JPP. Japan believed 
that as the risk to the SBT stock is minimal with the payback system incorporated in the 
JPP, the Commission should make a positive decision to implement the JPP. 
 
New Zealand reminded Parties of its view that it had previously expressed, that 
experimental fishing was only one of a number of measures that could be taken to 
address uncertainty. The Commission needs to address at least eight areas of uncertainty 
and these must not be forgotten in focussing on experimental fishing. New Zealand 
undertook to provide comments to Japan about their revised JPP. 
 
Australia noted its concerns about risks to the stock, the design of an EFP, the 
management framework in which an EFP would take place and the integrity and 
verification mechanisms of any possible EFP, particularly in the light of the illegal 
fishing incident in December 1996. 
 
Australia concluded by stating that, like New Zealand, it was happy to provide Japan 
with substantive comments on the details of Japan's Revised JPP, but this in no way 
detracted from the imperative of completing the work embodied in Steps 1 and 2. 
 
The schedule for further work on experimental fishing is included under Agenda Item 
12: Forward Work Program for the Commission. 
 
Agenda Item 4: 
Total Allowable Catch and National Quota Allocation 
 
Japan reiterated its proposal made at the first part of CCSBT 3 to increase the TAC by 
3,000 tonnes, or more, and said that it was still valid, and the case was even 
strengthened because the revised Japanese VPA analysis indicated that the SBT parental 
biomass will recover to the 1980 level by 2020 with a probability of 100 percent under 
the Japanese scientists' weighting scheme and 60 percent plus even under the Australian 
and New Zealand weightings. 
 
Japan also pointed out that Australia and New Zealand had been fishing for SBT 
without a 1996/1997 TAC. Therefore, it emphasised the importance of solving this 
abnormal situation as soon as possible. Japan also drew the attention of the Commission 
to its proposal on a future national quota allocation system, which is supposed to be 
discussed at CCSBT 4. 
 
New Zealand said that the issue of the TAC and national allocation was central to the 
operation of the Commission and it was of concern to New Zealand that the 
Commission was not able to reach a decision at the conclusion of the previous meeting.  
New Zealand said the Convention was clear about the Commission's responsibilities in 
this regard. Uncertainties remain about future projections, but there is agreement about 
the current status of the stock. Japan had produced a new VPA assessment but the 
Commission would not be able to use it until it has been reviewed through the stock 
assessment process. Given New Zealand's view of the current assessment, it would not 
be responsible to increase the level of catch. Indeed, serious consideration would need 
 
7
to be given to TAC reduction in the near future if the outlook in the assessment did not 
improve. Action to increase catch would be likely to attract considerable international 
criticism of the Commission. 
 
Australia noted that there is substantial agreement on present levels of stock amongst 
the members. The current parental stock is estimated as being less than eight percent of 
the 1960 parental biomass and even lower when compared with virgin parental biomass, 
as substantial fishing had occurred by 1960. Under any modern system of management 
this level would warrant severe catch restraint to allow some recovery. Australia's view 
was that there were no grounds for increasing TAC above the present level. Australia 
noted that with respect to Japan's revised VPA, it is neither reasonable nor sensible to 
considered one party's additional work to which other parties have not been involved 
and which had not been reviewed by the Scientific Committee. Australia considered that 
the TAC should be set no higher than the current level and if set at that level, national 
allocations should remain the same. 
 
The Commission agreed to maintain the TAC and national allocations at the same levels 
as agreed for the 1995/96 season (TAC of 11750 tonnes and national allocations of 
Australia 5265 tonnes, New Zealand 420 tonnes and Japan 6065 tonnes). 
 
Agenda Item 5: 
Future Action on Ecologically Related Species 
 
Japan noted that it was not an acceptable situation to inadvertently catch seabirds, 
especially those endangered. It was therefore necessary for the Commission to take 
appropriate measures and actions so that the Commission is recognised as responding 
appropriately to the situation. 
 
Both New Zealand and Australia noted their appreciation of Japan's draft 
recommendations which they considered a step forward is addressing this issue. They 
further acknowledged the Commission's wider responsibility to address the incidental 
mortality of seabirds. The Commission, as a regional fishery management body, had a 
role to collect information, increase understanding, and reduce incidental catches of 
seabirds in longline fisheries. 
 
The New Zealand paper outlined four broad categories of conclusions drawn from the 
Ecologically Related Species Working Group's (ERSWG) first meeting and noted that it 
strongly supported setting a time and venue for the second ERSWG meeting.  
 
A discussion followed on whether the Working Group should be formally convened as a 
permanent Standing Committee of the Commission. 
 
Japan was of the opinion that it was not appropriate to set up a Standing Committee on 
ERS or to change the name of the Working Group as its work is not essential to the 
functioning of the organisation in the same way as are finance, administration and 
compliance. 
 
New Zealand and Australia believed however that given the importance of this issue, a 
change of the ERSWG to a Standing Committee was warranted. 
 
8
 
There was no agreement to change the name of the Working Group. 
 
New Zealand presented a proposal for an international technical workshop on seabird 
bycatch mitigation research and sought the support of Members to hold such a 
workshop and to agree to sponsor or co-sponsor it. 
 
The purpose of the workshop would be to further reduce incidental mortality of seabirds 
in longline fishing by: 
a) 
encouraging the international adoption of effective bycatch mitigation measures; 
b) 
providing an opportunity to develop international collaboration into research into 
 
bycatch mitigation measures; and 
c) 
demonstrating the Commission's work and leadership in this area internationally. 
 
Although the Commission supported the workshop in principle, there was no consensus 
on sponsorship of the workshop. New Zealand undertook to refine the proposal and to 
forward it to parties intersessionally. 
 
The parties agreed on the recommendation relating to Ecologically Related Species, 
especially the Incidental Mortality of Seabirds by Longline Fishing (Attachment E) 
and agreed to table a range of questions to be addressed on ERS issues, to be developed 
intersessionally (Attachment F). 
 
Agenda Item 6: 
Report on CCAMLR Issues 
 
Mr Edwards, as the CCAMLR representative, reported to the Members on issues 
relating to the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
(CCAMLR). Mr Edwards advised that he had received a request from the Executive 
Secretary of CCAMLR to provide for the attendance of a CCAMLR observer at 
meetings of the ERSWG and provide a channel for the exchange of other information.  
This was agreed and the Commission asked the Executive Secretary to invite a 
representative of CCAMLR to attend the second meeting of ERSWG. 
 
Mr Edwards also mentioned that CCAMLR wished to encourage the Commission to 
implement provisions to reduce incidental capture of seabirds in areas adjacent to the 
CCAMLR Convention area. In this regard the Commission requested the Executive 
Secretary to send a copy of the report of the first meeting of the ERSWG to CCAMLR 
together with a copy of the recommendations of the Commission addressing the issue of 
incidental capture of seabirds. 
 
The Commission also agreed that the Executive Secretary should thank CCAMLR for 
the copy of its publication Fish the Sea not the Skies and request CCAMLR to provide 
for the attendance of a CCSBT observer at the next meeting of its Working Group on 
Incidental Mortality Arising from Longline Fishing or at meetings of other relevant 
subsidiary bodies. 
 
Finally, the Commission discussed a proposal to financially support the translation of a 
seabird identification guide to be published by CCAMLR. The meeting decided to seek 
 
9
more information on this publication and others available and deferred this matter to the 
second meeting of the ERSWG for further consideration. 
 
Agenda Item 7: 
Relationship with Third Parties 
 
7.1 Korea, Indonesia and Taiwan 
 
All members supported the Secretariat's paper on this issue and noted the need for the 
Commission to take stronger action than in the past to secure the participation of third 
parties, and also highlighted the relationship of the CCSBT to the UNIA. They noted the 
obligations embodied in the UNIA for countries and entities fishing for highly 
migratory fish stocks to either accede to, or to agree to apply, the conservation and 
management measures of the relevant fisheries regime. 
 
The parties expressed strong concern at the continued expansion of catch by 
non-Member parties such as Korea, Indonesia and Taiwan, at a time when the 
Commission parties were exercising restraint. It was noted the three non-member 
parties had all signed or expressed support for the UN Agreement and they should be 
urged to seriously consider the communications from the Commission to accede to the 
Convention or apply the Commission's management measures. Japan noted the need for 
the Commission to also address other countries that were just starting to fish for SBT. 
 
It was agreed that: 
a) 
each party would nominate a representative to work as part of a small team to 
 
develop and consider options for encouraging Korea and Indonesia to join the 
 
CCSBT and Taiwan to cooperate with its management measures; 
b) 
the Commission's representatives would seek direct discussions with 
 
representatives from Indonesia, Korea and Taiwan to encourage the accession of 
 
Korea and Indonesia to the Convention and to seek Taiwan's agreement to apply 
 
the Commission's management measures. 
 
Republic of Korea 
 
Korea noted again that it was actively considering joining the Commission, but the 
proposed quota was too small to sustain Korea's SBT fishing fleet. The Korean 
representative indicated that Korea, even as a non member of the CCSBT, would 
co-operate with the Commission in conserving and managing the SBT stock and was 
prepared to have one of its scientists attend the next CCSBT Scientific Committee 
meeting as an observer. 
 
The Commission sought information from Korea on the discrepancy between its stated 
catch of 1,150 tonnes (corrected to 1,179 by Korea) and Japanese import statistics 
which indicated a significantly lower catch than could be expected if 80 percent of 
Korea's catch was exported, as claimed, to Japan. Korea indicated that its domestic 
consumption was increasing. The Commission also commented on the large Korean 
catch claimed and noted the extensive fishing areas indicated for the eight Korean 
vessels operating in the fishery were largely outside known fishing areas. There 
appeared to be only a slight overlap with traditionally fished SBT areas. 
 
10
 
Korea indicated that a specific policy answer on the issue of Korean industry expansion 
and other issues raised by the Commission could be provided in writing if the 
Commission so requested. 
 
Taiwan 
 
Taiwan reaffirmed its intent to become a full Member and said that, to co-operate with 
the Commission, it had imposed a maximum catch of 1450 tonnes in 1996. Taiwan 
stated that its catch for 1996 was within this limit and it would maintain that limit while 
the current TAC prevailed. If the Commission agreed to raise the TAC in future, it 
would increase its catch limit by the same percentage. 
 
The Commission discussed the matter of the nomenclature to be used for 
Taiwan/Chinese Taipei and decided that the matter would be considered at the next 
Annual Meeting. 
 
7.2 Other Non-Members 
 
All parties expressed support for aspects of the Secretariat's recommendations for work 
to identify countries which were eligible to join the CCSBT, and for inviting these 
countries to attend as observers and join the regime. Japan indicated that because of the 
lack of certainty in data, efforts should be concentrated on countries that were known to 
be fishing for SBT. 
 
The Commission endorsed a process of gathering information and then considering 
possible invitations to identify other countries or entities which satisfy Articles 8.9 and 
14 of the Convention. It recommended that the issue be researched intersessionally and 
dealt with at the next Meeting, with decisions to be made there on whom to invite. 
 
The Commission endorsed the Secretariat seeking advice: 
a) 
from relevant international fisheries organisations which collect fishery data, on the 
 
origins of fishing fleets reported to be taking SBT; and, 
b) 
from the Scientific Committee on the countries through whose exclusive economic 
 
or fisheries zones SBT migrate. 
 
Agenda Item 8: 
CCSBT Current Management Strategy 
 
Two papers were tabled at the meeting. The first was a current management strategy 
document which had been prepared and circulated by the Secretariat and the second was 
a discussion paper on future management strategy developed by Australia. 
 
New Zealand and Australia stressed that the development of a management strategy was 
crucial for the future of the Commission, not only from an internal perspective, but also 
in terms of how outsiders view the Commission and its work. 
 
Both countries commented that the Secretariat's document was useful as a summary of 
the current situation, but stressed that it was not a forward-looking document and 
 
11
particularly lacked decision rules for catch limit decisions. Australia also noted that the 
Commission didn't actually have a future management strategy at present (the earlier 
one having expired). 
 
Japan noted that there were several areas requiring modification. The document 
included monitoring and compliance which was not appropriate, and the subject of an 
EFP was not included. With respect to the EFP, Australia said it would be appropriate to 
include objectives and principles agreed by the Commission. 
 
In reference to the Australian document, Japan noted that the Attachment containing 
decision rules appeared to capture its whole essence. Japan also pointed out that it had 
itself drafted a management strategy document at the time of the Second Annual 
Meeting which should be incorporated. 
 
Australia also asked the other parties to provide comments on the current version of the 
Australian document as soon as possible (and no later than within two months), so that 
these additional comments could also be incorporated into the revised Australian 
document. 
 
It was agreed that the members would also revise the Secretariat's paper as soon as 
possible to provide an agreed statement of the Commission's current management 
arrangements. This would be pursued intersessionally, and if agreement could not be 
reached by this mechanism, consider it again at CCSBT4. 
 
Agenda Item 9: 
Management Strategy Workshop Proposal 
 
The parties referred to their agreement in September 1996 that a management strategy 
workshop should be held in Australia. They agreed the workshop would be held during 
27-30 October 1997. 
 
Agenda Item 10: Scientific Committee - Procedures and Processes Workshop 
 
All parties agreed on the importance of holding this workshop as soon as possible, 
before the commencement of 1997 scientific process, so that problems associated with 
the scientific process could be resolved. They agreed on the importance of finalising the 
Rules of Procedure for the Scientific Committee as soon as possible. New Zealand 
stated that it was happy to use the draft prepared by Australia as a basis from which to 
agree on a final Rules of Procedure. Japan noted that its views on the Australian draft 
should already be clear to the other parties, as Japanese comments on that draft had 
already been submitted to the Secretariat. 
 
The Commission agreed to hold the Scientific Process Workshop during 13-16 May 
1997. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12
Agenda Item 11: Other Business 
 
11.1 Confidentiality of Commission Documents 
 
The Commission discussed the inadequacy of Rule 10 of the Rules of Procedure and a 
new draft text was prepared. Japan agreed in principle to the proposed framework but 
suggested that an additional clause was required to ensure that documents remain 
confidential unless decided otherwise by the Commission. 
 
New Zealand responded to Japan's concern by pointing out that the draft drew on the 
principle of transparency in decision-making described in Article 12 of the UNIA.  The 
draft represented a careful compromise between the need for transparency, which was 
required to meet legitimate interests of others in the operation of the Commission, and 
the Commission's need to have control over information it does not wish to make public 
either temporarily to allow consideration of advice, or because of reasons including 
diplomatic or commercial sensitivity. New Zealand then referred to the three paragraphs 
in the draft which allowed the Commission to accommodate confidentiality concerns. 
 
Japan then explained its position that all documents becoming public was unacceptable.  
Each Party should have the right to say what document should be confidential. The 
other members were concerned that this relitigated a key principle of transparency and 
treatment of documents which had been the basis for discussions in the small group. 
 
It was agreed that as there was no consensus to change Rule 10, therefore the 
Commission noted that the existing rule should continue. Rule 10 should be placed on 
the agenda of the next meeting of the Commission and the current draft be used as the 
basis for future discussions. 
 
11.2 Additional Financial Controls 
 
Draft arrangements for additional financial controls, prepared by the Secretariat on the 
basis of intersessional and informal discussions with Members, were discussed. The 
Commission approved the proposal at Attachment G. 
 
11.3 Incidental Mortality of Seabirds in Longline Fisheries – IUCN Resolution 
 
The Commission finalised the text of a letter to the IUCN concerning their resolution on 
seabirds (Attachment H). 
 
11.4 Terms of Reference for Compliance Committee 
 
New Zealand indicated its strong disappointment with the response of Japan to the 
illegal fishing incident and was concerned that the lack of real progress in improving the 
compliance regime would reflect poorly on the Commission when the information 
became public. New Zealand viewed the terms of reference (ToR's) as central to the 
Commission's approach to seriously addressing these issues over time. New Zealand  
suggested that Japan's reluctance to agree to key provisions indicated a lack of interest 
in improving the compliance regime through action taken as the responsible Flag State 
 
13
or in collaboration with the Commission. 
 
Japan indicated that as it had not yet ratified the UNIA it was premature to consider the 
Agreement in the context of collaborative compliance action. Japan indicated that it saw 
the issue of the ToR's as reflecting on the current Convention and on whether or not the 
Commission had the right to undertake high seas inspections. 
 
Australia considered that with respect to the ToR's adequacy to guide the Compliance 
Committee, they should be forward looking and address the issues that would clearly be 
on the agenda in the future, such as relevant systems to monitor fishing activities related 
to SBT. Australia indicated that, if the wording of the ToR did not reflect the capacity of 
the Compliance Committee to discuss substantive matters relating to co-operative 
compliance mechanisms, it would not be sensible to attempt to settle the ToR's at this 
meeting. 
 
It was agreed that the Commission would attempt to settle the ToR out of session, or, if 
that could not be achieved, to reconsider the matter at the next Annual Meeting. 
 
11.5 CCSBT Response to Correspondence Requesting a Suspension of SBT Fishing 
 
A draft response to correspondence requesting a suspension of SBT fishing was 
considered and agreed by the Commission (Attachment I). 
 
11.6 Draft CCSBT Position Statement on Non-Member Fishing Activities 
 
A draft communique on non-member fishing activities was considered and agreed by 
the Commission (Attachment J). 
 
11.7 Draft Terms of Reference for the Finance and Administration Committee 
 
In accordance with the instructions from the first session of CCSBT 3, draft terms of 
reference for the Finance and Administration Committee were prepared for 
consideration by the Commission. The finalised and approved Terms of Reference are at 
Attachment K. 
 
Agenda Item 12: Forward Work Program for the Commission 
 
The Commission agreed to the program of work set out in Attachment L, including the 
following meetings and workshops during the next year: 
a) 
Scientific Process Workshop on 13-15 May 1997 
b) 
ERSWG meeting on 3-5 June 1997 
c) 
Management Strategy Workshop on 27-30 October 1997 
 
The Commission agreed that the Scientific Committee meeting would be held from 28 
July to 8 August 1997 and that its purpose would be to only undertake collaborative 
work on Steps 1 & 2, including VPA modelling. 
 
The Commission agreed to conduct the 4th CCSBT Meeting during 8 to 13 September 
 
14
and that the meeting would: 
a) 
consider the outcomes from the Scientific Committee's consideration of Steps 1 & 2; 
b) make a decision on whether to proceed with further work on experimental fishing 
(full scale or pilot program); 
c) 
set an annual TAC on the basis of the 1996 stock assessment and outcomes from 
the 1997 Scientific Committee work on Steps 1 & 2. 
 
The Commission also agreed to make provision in late 1997 and the first half of 1998 
for Step 3 work if agreed at CCSBT4. It included in the schedule the option of a Special 
Commission meeting dependent on the successful completion of Step 3. 
 
The parties agreed to try to resolve outstanding matters including the text of the 
Secretariat's Current Management Arrangements document and the Compliance 
Committee's Terms of Reference by correspondence or if they cannot be settled, to 
consider them at the 4th CCSBT Commission meeting. 
 
Agenda Item 13:  Close of the Meeting 
 
13.1 Election of Chair and Vice Chair for 1997 
 
Phillip Major of the Ministry of Fisheries, New Zealand, was elected as the new Chair 
of the Commission and Yasuo Takase of the Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
Fishery Division, was elected as Vice Chair. 
 
13.2 Preparation and Adoption of the Report of the Reconvened Meeting 
 
It was agreed to adopt the report of this meeting. 
 
13.3 Closure of the Meeting  
 
The Commission acknowledged the excellent work of the Chair over the last three years.  
All delegations acknowledged the interpreters and the Secretariat for their hard work. 
 
 
 
Alison Turner 
Chair 
CCSBT 
22.2.97 
 
 
Amendment made: 
 
In the second paragraph of Agenda Item 2: Compliance Issues, “1997/98” was amended 
from “1996/97” by correspondence in October 1997. 
 
List of Attachments 
 
 
Attachment A 
Agenda 
 
 
 
B 
List of Participants 
 
 
 
C 
Summary Report of Secretariat Activities 
 
 
 
D 
Commission's Logo 
 
 
 
E 
Recommendations Relating to Ecologically Related Species,  
 
 
 
 
Especially the Incidental Mortality of Seabirds by Longline Fishing 
 
 
 
F 
Questions For the Ecologically Related Species Working Group 
 
 
 
G 
Financial Rules Established by the Executive Secretary Under  
 
 
 
 
Regulation 9.1 of the Financial Regulations 
 
 
 
H 
Letter to IUCN on resolution on seabird catch by longline 
 
 
 
I 
Response to Correspondence Requesting a Suspension of SBT  
 
 
 
 
Fishing 
 
 
 
J 
CCSBT Communique on Non-member Fishing Activities 
 
 
 
K 
Draft Terms of Reference for the Standing Committee for Finance 
 
 
 
 
and Administration 
 
 
 
L 
Revised Work Program for CCSBT 
 
Attachment A 
 
Agenda 
 
 
1. 
Opening of Meeting 
 
1.1 Welcoming Address  
 
1.2 Meeting Arrangements  
 
1.3 Appointment of Rapporteurs 
 
1.4 Adoption of Agenda 
 
1.5 Member's Reports 
 
1.6 Secretariat Report 
2. 
Compliance Issues 
3. 
Proposal to Implement a Pilot Program on Experimental Fishing 
4. 
Global Total Allowable Catch and Quota Allocation 
 
4.1 Global Quota 
 
4.2 National Allocations 
5. 
Future Action on Ecologically Related Species 
6. 
Report on CCAMLR Issues 
7. 
Relationship with Third Parties 
 
7.1 Korea, Indonesia and Taiwan 
 
7.2 Other Non-Members 
8. 
CCSBT Current Management Strategy 
9. 
Management Strategy Workshop Proposal 
10. Scientific Committee - Procedures and Processes Workshop 
11. Other Business 
 
11.1 Confidentiality of Commission Documents 
 
11.2 Additional Financial Controls 
 
11.3 Incidental Mortality of Seabirds in Longline Fisheries - IUCN Resolution 
 
11.4 Terms of Reference for Compliance Committee 
 
11.5 CCSBT Response to Correspondence Requesting a Suspension of SBT  
 
 
Fishing 
 
11.6 Draft CCSBT Position Statement on Non-Member Fishing Activities 
 
11.7 Draft Terms of Reference for the Finance and Administration Committee 
12. Forward Work Program for the Commission 
13. Close of the Meeting 
 
13.1 Election of Chair and Vice Chair for 1997 
 
13.2 Preparation and Adoption of the Report of the Reconvened Meeting 
 
13.3 Closure of the Meeting  
 
Attachment B 
 
List of Participants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chair 
Dr Alison TURNER 
 
 
First Assistant Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Petroleum and Fisheries Division  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Primary Industries and Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Australia 
Delegation 
Ms Mary HARWOOD  
 
Assistant Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Branch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Primary Industries and Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Head of Delegation) 
 
Mr Neil HERMES  
 
 
Acting Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Relations Section 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Branch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Primary Industries and Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Alternate Head) 
 
Mr Nick RAYNS  
 
 
Manager 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SBT, Western Tuna and Billfish Fisheries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Australian Fisheries Management Authority 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Alternate Head) 
 
Government Experts and Advisers 
Mr Peter NEAVE  
 
 
SBT, Western Tuna and Billfish Fisheries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Australian Fisheries Management Authority 
 
Ms Joan LEARY  
 
 
SBT, Western Tuna and Billfish Fisheries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Australian Fisheries Management Authority 
 
Mr Matt GLEESON 
 
 
Senior Operations Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compliance and Monitoring 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Australian Fisheries Management Authority 
 
Mr Peter CASSELLS  
 
Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Relations Section 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Branch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Primary Industries and Energy 
 
Mr Anthony PIGOUNIS 
 
International Relations Section 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Branch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Primary Industries and Energy 
 
Dr Derek STAPLES 
 
 
Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fisheries Resources Branch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bureau of Resource Sciences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Primary Industries and Energy 
 
Dr Chris O'BRIEN 
 
 
Senior Research Scientist 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fisheries Resources Branch 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bureau of Resource Sciences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Primary Industries and Energy 
 
Dr Keith SAINSBURY  
 
Program Leader 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pelagic Fisheries Resources Program 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Division of Marine Research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CSIRO 
 
Dr Tom POLACHECK  
 
Senior Research Scientist 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pelagic Fisheries Resources Program 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Division of Marine Research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CSIRO 
 
Mr Neil HUGHES  
 
 
Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marine Strategy Section 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Portfolio Marine Group 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environment Australia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of the Environment, Sport and Territories 
 
Mr Andrew McNEE 
 
 
Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wildlife and Marine Management Section 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biodiversity Group 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environment Australia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of the Environment, Sport and Territories 
 
Ms Kerry TRUELOVE  
 
Senior Project Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wildlife and Marine Management Section 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biodiversity Group 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environment Australia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of the Environment, Sport and Territories 
 
Ms Patricia BROWNING  
Sea Law and Ocean Policy Group 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Legal Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
 
Ms Michaela BROWNING  
Japan Section 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
 
Dr Rosalie BALKIN 
 
 
Office of International Law 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attorney-General's Department 
 
Non-government Experts and Advisers 
Mr Glenn SANT  
 
 
TRAFFIC Oceania 
 
Mr Brian JEFFRIESS  
 
President 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tuna Boat Owners Association of Australia 
 
Mr Terry ROMERO 
 
 
Tuna Boat Owners Association of Australia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Japan 
Delegation 
Mr Minoru MORIMOTO 
 
Councillor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Oceanic Fisheries Department 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fisheries Agency 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Head of Delegation) 
 
Government Experts and Advisers 
Mr Masayuki KOMATSU  
Deputy Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Far Seas Fisheries Division 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fisheries Agency 
 
Mr Kazuhiko UTSUMI  
 
Deputy Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marine Resources Division 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fisheries Agency 
 
Mr Joji MORISHITA  
 
Deputy Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Affairs Division 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fisheries Agency 
 
Mr Hiroshi TAKENOI  
 
Section Chief 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Far Seas Fisheries Division 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fisheries Agency 
 
Dr Sachiko TSUJI  
 
 
Chief Scientist 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Temperate Tuna Research Group 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries 
 
Mr Kenro IINO 
 
 
 
Councillor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Embassy of Japan 
 
Mr Michio IIDA  
 
 
Councillor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Embassy of Japan 
 
Ms Naoko HAMAGUCHI  
Fisheries Division 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
 
Advisers to the Delegation 
Mr Tsutomu WATANABE  
Federation of Japan Tuna Fisheries Cooperative  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Associations 
 
Mr Yuji KAWAI  
 
 
Federation of Japan Tuna Fisheries Cooperative  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Associations 
 
Mr Keigo HARADA  
 
Federation of Japan Tuna Fisheries Cooperative  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Associations 
 
Mr Yoshikatsu HATAKEYAMA Federation of Japan Tuna Fisheries Cooperative  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Associations 
 
Mr Kanetsugu NISHIKAWA 
Federation of Japan Tuna Fisheries Cooperative  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Associations 
 
Mr Toshiaki KANAZAWA  
National Ocean Tuna Fisheries Association 
 
Mr Hiroaki YAMAMOTO  
National Ocean Tuna Fisheries Association 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Zealand 
Delegation 
Mr Mark EDWARDS  
 
Policy Manager 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Fisheries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Head of Delegation) 
 
Dr Talbot MURRAY 
 
 
Programme Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pelagic Fisheries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research 
 
Ms Lisa FUTSCHEK  
 
Policy Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Economics Division 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
 
Government Experts and Advisers 
Ms Lee ROBINSON 
 
 
Policy Analyst 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Head Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Fisheries 
 
Ms Bridget NICHOLS  
 
Policy Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Legal Division 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
 
Mr Jim NICOLSON 
 
 
Senior Conservation Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Species Protection Unit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Conservation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Korean Observer 
Mr Joon-Seog KANG  
 
Deputy Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Organisation Division 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Maritime Affairs and Fisheries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taiwan Observers 
Mr Fadah HSIEH  
 
  
Taiwan Economic and Cultural Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Canberra 
 
Mr Eugene CHEN  
 
 
Taiwan Economic and Cultural Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Canberra 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CCSBT Secretariat 
Mr Campbell McGREGOR  
Executive Secretary 
 
Ms Maree TOOHEY 
 
 
Business Manager 
 
Ms Kozue LOGHEM  
 
Administrative Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interpreters 
Ms Saemi BABA 
 
Ms Kumi KOIKE 
 
Attachment C 
 
Attachment C 
 
Summary Report of Secretariat Activities 
 
 
1. 
A schedule of the program of major activities for the Secretariat has been prepared 
and distributed to members; an update of that schedule follows. 
 
2. 
The schedule sets out the decisions from the previous meeting and the action taken 
 
to implement those decisions. The schedule also sets out other projects being 
 
undertaken by the Secretariat as agreed with the Chairperson and representatives of 
 
Commission members, to ensure the effective operation of the Commission. 
 
3. 
The following is a summary of the major activities: 
 
 
(a) In response to correspondence from the Secretariat, CITES and IUCN have 
 
 
acknowledged the CCSBT role in the conservation and management of SBT. 
 
 
(b) Papers relating the approach taken by some ICCAT members to the proposed 
 
 
listing of Northern Bluefin Tuna on CITES have been obtained. A copy of  
 
 
those papers is to be distributed at the meeting. 
 
 
(c) The Executive Secretary attended the recent meetings of ICCAT and IOTC: 
 
 
 
(i) While ICCAT did not make formal recommendations in regard to SBT,  
 
 
the fishery management recommendations were based on the  
 
 
 
 
understanding that the CCSBT was the primary organisation for the   
 
 
management of SBT, 
 
 
 
(ii) The ICCAT Secretariat agreed to maintain close working relations with 
 
 
 
CCSBT on matters of mutual interest, 
 
 
 
(iii) IOTC did not formally consider its relationship with CCSBT, however the 
 
 
 
statement prepared by the CCSBT Secretariat for consideration by IOTC 
 
 
 
was distributed to members and the draft Rules of Procedure for the IOTC 
 
 
 
were amended to facilitate a close working relationship between the two 
 
 
 
organisations. 
 
 
 
A copy of the Executive Secretary's report on the meetings was distributed to 
 
 
members on 6 January 1997. 
 
 
(d) Letters were sent to Indonesia and Korea concerning cooperation with CCSBT 
 
 
by provision of data on their SBT fisheries and proposals concerning their  
 
 
membership of CCSBT. These matters are to be considered in more detail  
 
 
under agenda item 2. 
 
 
(e) Information on the collection and management of data for 11 international  
 
 
organisations was obtained as part of the task of developing an arrangement 
 
 
for management of data for the SBT fishery. A schedule of the information has 
 
 
been sent to the Chairman of the Scientific Committee for consideration and 
 
 
development of proposals by that Committee. 
 
 
(f) In response to requests from outside organisations for the release of   
 
 
Commission papers and subsequent discussions with the Chairperson and  
 
 
representatives from member countries, the Secretariat prepared and   
 
 
distributed a draft paper on confidentiality of documents. The paper is  
 
 
 
scheduled for consideration under agenda item 9. 
 
 
(g) The Secretariat prepared and circulated a draft paper proposing additional  
 
 
financial controls to provide for Commission involvement in changes to  
 
 
budget forecasts and approval of major items of expenditure. The paper is  
 
 
scheduled for consideration under agenda item 9. 
 
 
(h) The Secretariat has prepared the first draft of a paper setting out the   
 
 
Commission's current strategy for the conservation and management of SBT.  
 
This paper is intended to complement and support a paper being prepared by  
 
Australia on future strategies for the Commission. To be considered in more  
 
detail under agenda item 6. 
 
 
(i) The Secretariat has commenced work on the paper describing the history of 
 
 
the SBT fishery and the establishment of the Commission. The paper draws on 
 
 
existing publications in this area and, to a small extent, on information from 
 
 
persons directly involved in drafting the Convention. The draft will be  
 
 
circulated to members for comment when it is available. 
 
 
 
In addition, arrangements are in hand to set up a site for the CCSBT on the 
 
 
 
World Wide Web. Documents and reports which are available to the 
public   
 
will be available on this site for on-line computer access. 
 
 
(j) The first draft of the translation of the report of the first session of the Third 
 
 
Annual Commission Meeting has been prepared and forwarded to Japan for 
 
 
consideration. The Secretariat is continuing inquires to identify reliable  
 
 
translators to facilitate timely translation of Commission documents and  
 
 
reports. 
 
 
(k) Options for a logo for the CCSBT have been circulated to members for  
 
 
consideration. Preferred designs are currently being refined by a graphic  
 
 
designer. 
 
 
(l) Selection of a Japanese national to the position of Deputy Executive Secretary 
 
 
has been finalised. 
 
SECRETARIAT OF THE COMMISSION FOR THE CONSERVATION OF SOUTHERN BLUEFIN TUNA 
PROGRAM OF MAJOR ACTIVITIES, INCORPORATING THE DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSION’S THIRD MEETING 
(23 - 27 SEPTEMBER 1996) 
Decision 
Priority 
Action 
Party 
Specific 
Action 
Status 
Agenda Item 3: Relation to other Bodies 
 
3.1 CITES – including action by IUCN relating to the listing of SBT 
 
The Commission recognised the need to ensure that the relevant organisations and entities were fully aware 
of the work being done by the Commission and agreed on the following course of action: 
 
a) the Secretariat will make formal representation to the IUCN, including the Species Survival 
Commission, seeking agreement for the CCSBT to be represented in technical meetings where SBT and 
related issues are to be considered. This includes any review of the Red List Criteria for marine species; 
Short term 
SEC 
SEC to draft 
Contact 
made with 
IUCN 
officials 
CCSBT 
acknowledg
ed as being 
a relevant 
orgn. in 
marine 
issues 
b) advise the Species Survival Commission of the Commission’s views about the listing of southern bluefin 
tuna on the IUCN’s Red List of Threatened Animals and the criteria used; 
Short term 
NZ / SEC 
Seek initial 
advice from 
NZ, clear with 
members 
necessary 
action taken 
as (a) above 
c) the Secretariat will coordinate the preparation of an information paper setting out the CCSBT position on 
SBT and action taken to facilitate stock recovery. The paper should include reference to the qualifications 
attached to the IUCN listing. This paper would be used for distribution to the IUCN, interest groups and the 
media as required; 
Medium 
term 
SEC / ALL 
Necessary 
action to be 
taken in 
conjunction 
with (a).  
Relates to (f) 
below. 
 
d) The Commission will begin work to develop and document an effective management strategy to rebuild 
the southern bluefin tuna. This would be a component of a process to demonstrate the competence of the 
CCSBT; 
Medium 
term 
ALL 
Sec to prepare 
first draft 
first draft 
circulated 
16/1/96 
e) the Secretariat will make formal representation to the CITES Secretariat informing them of the CCSBT 
role in SBT management and requesting that the CCSBT be advised, as soon as practical, of any 
recommendations to list SBT or Atlantic bluefin tuna under CITES; 
Short term 
SEC 
Letter to be 
prepared by 
Secretariat 
reply 
received - 
completed 
 
 
f) the Secretariat to coordinate the preparation, by CCSBT members, of a draft communication which could 
 
 
Medium 
 
 
SEC / ALL 
 
 
ICCAT 
 
 
to be 
Decision 
Priority 
Action 
Party 
Specific 
Action 
Status 
 
be submitted to countries or entities which may seek consultations on a CITES listing of SBT, and to 
CITES should an application be made for a listing.                          The CCSBT is to study 
the approach adopted by ICCAT members in relation to proposals to list Northern Bluefin Tuna on CITES. 
term 
Short term 
documentation 
received 
distributed 
at CCSBT 
R3 
3.2 IOTC  
 
The Commission endorsed the following course of action: 
 
a) the Acting Executive Secretary would attend the next meeting of the IOTC as an observer and seek leave 
to present a statement on behalf of the CCSBT; 
 
 
Short term 
 
 
SEC 
 
 
prepare 
statement, 
attend meeting 
 
 
Completed 
b) the statement to be presented would be coordinated by the Secretariat and developed cooperatively by 
the parties. The statement would advocate the CCSBT’s primacy and  competence for the management of 
SBT. It would suggest that the IOTC and the CCSBT develop a more formal arrangement for cooperation 
on issues including:  
 
i) data exchange; 
 
ii) management measures adopted by the respective organisations;  
 
iii) reciprocal attendance at meetings; and  
 
iv) recognition of the competence of the CCSBT to manage SBT. 
 
SEC / ALL 
Sec to prepare 
statement and 
circulate for 
comment to 
members 
Completed 
3.3 ICCAT 
 
The Commission agreed that the Secretariat would determine the process within which the Commission 
could provide information to the management and technical meetings of ICCAT and that the Acting 
Executive Secretary would participate as an observer at the next ICCAT meeting. 
 
 
Short term 
 
 
SEC 
 
 
Ex. Sec to 
attend meeting 
and prepare a 
short statement 
 
 
Completed 
3.4 CCAMLR 
 
Mr Edwards has undertaken to prepare a report about the Ecologically Related Species (ERS) issues in the 
CCSBT. New Zealand will coordinate the preparation of this report through the Secretariat and in 
collaboration with the other parties. 
Short term 
NZ / AUS / 
SEC 
ERS Report 
given to 
CCAMLR. 
Summary 
CCSBT 
Report to be 
prepared for 
CCAMLR 
Completed 
The Commission agreed that Mr Neil Hermes from Australia would represent the CCSBT as an observer at 
the next CCAMLR meeting to be held 21 October–1 November 1996. 
 
N Hermes / 
SEC 
Sec to advise 
CCAMLR,   
N Hermes to 
attend meeting 
 
Await 
report 
Agenda Item 4: Administrative Arrangements 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
Priority 
Action 
Party 
Specific 
Action 
Status 
 
 
4.2 Review of 1996 Budget, Draft 1997 Budget 
 
The Commission endorsed the draft budget at Attachment F, subject to the variations, and on the basis that 
the additional estimated expenditure of $25,000 be met from the reserve funds carried over from 1996. 
 
Short term 
 
SEC 
 
circulate 
revised budget 
to members 
 
completed 
Terms of Reference for the Finance and Administration Committee 
 
The group considered it appropriate for the Secretariat to consult with international fishery management 
organisations on the existing functions and programme of work of their finance committee. The Chair of 
the Finance and Administration Committee, with the Secretariat, should develop draft Terms of Reference 
for the Committee for consideration intersessionally. Terms of Reference shall be agreed intersessionally to 
facilitate the operation of the Committee from 1997. 
Medium 
term 
Japan / 
ALL 
Sec to obtain 
international 
treaties and/or 
write to 
relevant 
bodies.     
Sec and Chair 
of Finance and 
Admin 
Committee to 
draft TOR, and 
circulate for 
comment to 
members 
relevant 
info 
received 
from 
IATTC, 
ICCAT & 
IWC. 
TOR being 
developed 
Chair of Finance and Administration Committee 
 
The Commission agreed that Japan would be the initial Chair of the Finance and Administration Committee 
for two years. 
 
 
 
Japan 
 
 
Japan 
appointed as 
Chair 
 
 
completed 
4.3 Amendment to Staff Regulations Relating to Social Security Contributions  
 
The Commission endorsed amendments to Staff Regulation 8.1 by replacing the words up to a maximum of 
14% with up to the maximum percentage applying in the United Nations Secretariat from time to time. 
 
 
Short term 
 
 
SEC 
 
 
Sec to update 
Staff 
Regulation 8.1 
 
 
Completed 
4.4 Adoption of Headquarters Agreement 
 
It was agreed that the Headquarters Agreement be signed intersessionally as soon as possible after the 
relevant domestic legal issues have been dealt with and Australian Government approval obtained. 
 
Aust / ALL 
Once approved, 
seek members 
signatures 
intersessionally
awaiting 
advice from 
Aust. 
 
 
Agenda Item 5: Review of SBT Fisheries 
 
 
Medium 
 
 
SEC / ALL 
 
 
Sec to 
 
 
report 
Decision 
Priority 
Action 
Party 
Specific 
Action 
Status 
 
 
It was agreed that for future meetings of the Commission all members (and relevant invited observers) be 
asked to submit a brief written report under standard headings for this item. Reports would need to be 
submitted in sufficient time to allow both English and Japanese language versions to be distributed by the 
start of the meeting. 
 
term 
coordinate 
preparation of 
report format, 
and circulate 
for comment 
to members.  
All members 
to submit 
written report 
to Sec before 
meetings.  
Sec to organise 
translation. 
template 
sent to 
members 
29/10/96 – 
completed 
 
5.4.2  The Republic of Korea 
 
The Commission agreed that the Chair would write to the Government of Korea, seeking information on 
their SBT fishery, which the Republic of Korea was unable to provide at this meeting. 
Short term 
SEC 
Write letter to 
Korean Govt. 
including 
questions 
agreed by 
members. 
sent 3/10/96 
– completed 
 
 
5.4.3  The Republic of Indonesia 
 
The Commission agreed that the Chair would also write to the Government of Indonesia, seeking 
information on the Indonesian SBT fishery, which was unable to be provided at this meeting. 
Short term 
SEC 
Write letter to 
Indonesian 
Govt. 
including 
questions 
agreed by 
members. 
sent 3/10/96 
– completed 
Agenda Item 6: FAO — Coordinating Working Party on Statistics 
 
The Commission recognised the utility of sending a CCSBT observer to the 17th meeting of the FAO – 
Coordinating Working Party (CWP) on Statistics to be held at CCAMLR’s Office in Hobart, Australia, 3 - 7 
March 1997. The observer would be either the Executive Secretary or a member of the parties, who would 
report back the Commission on the costs and benefits for the CCSBT to join the CWP as a member. The 
Commission would consider its future approach to the CWP at the next annual meeting.  
 
Medium 
term 
SEC / ALL 
CCSBT 4 
Sec to 
establish the 
status of 
CCSBT 
representation 
at this meeting 
placed on 
preliminary 
agenda 
 
Agenda Item  7: 
Matter Arising from Previous Meeting — CCSBT Position on Kyoto Declaration  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
Priority 
Action 
Party 
Specific 
Action 
Status 
 
 
 
 
 
and Other International Fishing Initiatives 
 
With regard to a general approach to various other international fisheries initiatives, the parties recognised 
the usefulness of the paper prepared by the Secretariat (Attachment M) and agreed to its 
recommendations: 
 
a) that members of the Commission advise the Secretariat of relevant inter-governmental and other 
international organisations with which they are associated; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Medium 
term 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ALL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Members to 
provide lists, 
Sec also 
collecting 
information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
awaiting 
advice from 
members 
b) that the Secretariat identify other inter-governmental or international organisations and international 
instruments which could affect the conservation and management of southern bluefin tuna; 
Medium 
term 
SEC 
Sec to obtain 
international 
treaties and 
summary docs 
from FAO 
preliminary 
assessment 
drafted 
c) that the Secretariat report to the Commission on the relevant organisations and international instruments 
which could affect the conservation and management of southern bluefin tuna and include 
recommendations on whether the Commission should: 
 
(i) 
take no action; 
 
(ii) monitor activities of the organisation; 
 
(iii) seek to collaborate with the organisation, which could include data; 
 
(iv) exchange and inviting observers to Commission meetings; 
 
(v) 
seek to enter into formal arrangements with the organisation; OR  
 
(vi) adopt all or part of the provisions of relevant international instruments. 
Long term 
SEC 
CCSBT 4 
agenda 
 
placed on 
preliminary 
agenda 
Agenda Item 8:  
Ecologically Related Species 
 
 
 
 
Report from the Ecologically Related Species Working Group 
 
In the absence of agreement on how best to proceed with the conclusions and recommendations of the ERS 
Working Group Report it was agreed that the matter would be considered further at the resumed third 
Annual Meeting of the Commission. 
 
 
 
Short term 
 
 
 
 
CCSBT 3 
reconvened 
meeting 
 
 
 
Sec action 
completed 
Decision 
Priority 
Action 
Party 
Specific 
Action 
Status 
 
Agenda Item 10: 
Research and Monitoring Programs 
 
10.1 Implementation of Article 8 (1) of the Convention, Data Collection  
 
The Commission agreed on the data collection and exchange program at Attachment O and agreed that 
this program would apply in future years unless otherwise agreed. 
 
 
Long term 
 
 
ALL 
 
 
Members to 
comply with 
timetable in 
CCSBT 3 
Report 
 
 
Sec action 
completed 
The Commission agreed that proposals for the collection and management of data relating to Southern 
Bluefin Tuna be developed for consideration by the Commission by: 
 
a) the Secretariat assisting the Scientific Committee by undertaking an analysis of data collection 
arrangements in relevant international organisations and the costs to those organisations.  The Secretariat 
should confine its work to looking at existing arrangements in relevant international organisations.  [The 
Secretariat should also propose policies necessary to ensure confidentially of information.] 
 
 
 
Medium 
term 
 
 
 
SEC / 
Scientific 
Com. 
 
 
 
Sec to advise 
of outcomes of 
investigations 
 
 
 
Sec action 
on data 
collection 
& costs 
completed 
b) requesting the next Scientific Committee meeting to examine the: 
 
(i) nature and character of data, statistics and information to be collected (eg. catch/effort data, size, 
 
estimated age, tagging, Real Time Monitoring Programme (RTMP), recruitment, monitoring and 
 
research data); 
 
(ii) appropriate methods of compilation and management etc; 
 
(iii) required facilities and equipment such as Personal Computer, hard disc, software; 
 
(iv) required manpower; 
 
(v) estimated cost of the proposals; 
 
c) 
recognising that more work may be needed through other channels intersessionally. 
Medium 
term 
Scientific 
Com. 
Place on 
agenda for 
1997 Scientific 
Committee 
meeting 
 
 
10.2 Implementation of Article 8 (9) of the Convention, Monitoring 
 
The Commission agreed that the Compliance Committee develop a report and recommendations for action 
on implementing Article 8 (9) for the next Commission meeting. 
 
Long term 
AUST / 
Compliance 
Com 
Aust to initiate 
preliminary 
discussions 
with 
Committee 
members 
CCSBT 4 
awaiting 
advice from 
Aust.  
Placed on 
preliminary 
agenda 
Decision 
Priority 
Action 
Party 
Specific 
Action 
Status 
 
10.3 Collaborative Research Program 
 
Australia requested the Commission to adopt the otolith sampling and archiving proposal from the 
Scientific Committee. Australia proposed that the otolith archiving should be conducted by the CCSBT 
Secretariat. Japan expressed its support for both proposals on the condition that details of the proposal 
should be discussed in an appropriate manner, that sampling and archiving should not be controlled by a 
particular member, and that the projects should not interfere with commercial fishing operations. The 
Commission agreed that all parties should proceed with otholith sampling taking the above matter into 
consideration. 
Medium 
term 
SEC/ALL 
Sec to contact 
Chair of 
Scientific 
Committee 
regarding 
archiving. 
 
CCSBT4 
 
Agenda Item 12: 
Establishment of Future Quota Allocation Mechanism 
 
The Commission decided to discuss this matter at the next Annual Meeting. 
 
 
Long term 
 
 
 
 
 
CCSBT 4 
 
 
placed on 
preliminary 
agenda 
Agenda Item 15: 
Rules of Procedure for the Scientific Committee 
 
 
 
 
(including Agenda Item 16: Policy on Employment of External Scientists and  
 
 
 
 
Other Experts) 
 
It was agreed that a small workshop would be held involving senior managers and scientists of the parties 
to resolve the issues as listed in Attachment U. Resolution of the details of the meeting was deferred until 
the resumed third Annual Meeting of the Commission. 
 
 
 
 
Medium 
term 
 
 
 
 
 
CCSBT 3 
reconvened 
meeting 
 
 
placed on 
preliminary 
agenda 
Agenda Item 16: 
Terms of Reference for the Compliance Committee 
 
It was agreed that Australia would Chair this Committee for the next two years and, together with the 
Secretariat, would seek agreement to the Terms of Reference through diplomatic channels prior to the 
meeting of the committee which will be held in conjunction with the Fourth Annual Meeting. 
Short term 
 
ALL 
Seek Japan’s 
clearance on 
draft Terms of 
Reference 
Japan’s 
proposed 
changes 
forwarded 
to Aus & 
NZ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
Priority 
Action 
Party 
Specific 
Action 
Status 
 
Agenda Item 17: 
Program of Work for 1996-97 
 
17.5 Meeting/s of the Commission 
 
Agreement was reached on Standing Committees as follows: 
 
a) 
The Chair outlined the agreements to establish: 
 
(i) 
a Standing Committee for Compliance, and 
 
(ii) a Standing Committee for Finance and Administration,  
 
 
as well as revisions to the draft terms of reference of the Compliance Committee. It was agreed that 
 
the Committees would be formed and would usually meet immediately prior to the main plenary of 
 
the CCSBT, in parallel. A shorter plenary would deal with the substance of reports prepared by the 
 
Committees and other important matters. The committees were to be chaired by Australia and Japan 
 
respectively for the first two years. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aust / 
Japan 
 
 
Draft 
annotated 
agenda for  
CCSBT 4 
 
 
preliminary 
draft 
completed - 
to be 
reviewed 
after the 
close of 
CCSBT 3 
Agenda Item 18: 
Other Business 
 
Non Retention of Small Fish 
 
It was agreed that whatever policies are adopted by national fleets in regard to the non retention of fish, 
parties should encourage all of their fleets to operate consistently with their policies. 
 
 
 
 
Long term 
 
 
 
 
ALL 
 
 
 
 
Members to 
report back at 
CCSBT 4 
 
 
 
 
placed on 
preliminary 
agenda 
Agenda Item 19: 
Close of the Meeting 
 
19.2 Adoption of the Report of the Meeting  
 
The meeting approved and adopted the report of this first session of the Third Annual Meeting. 
 
SEC 
Distribute 
report to 
members and 
observers 
Sec action 
completed 
Decision 
Priority 
Action 
Party 
Specific 
Action 
Status 
 
19.3 Closure of the Meeting 
 
The Commission agreed to adjourn this meeting. 
 
The Commission agreed to a programme for data collection and exchange for the annual stock assessment 
which would be followed in 1997 and future years unless varied by agreement. On this basis it was agreed 
that the Scientific Committee would be held from 28 July to 8 August 1997. The Commission also agreed 
that, subject to confirmation, the Fourth Annual Commission Meeting would be held from 8 to 13 
September 1997. The Commission agreed to the set of questions to be addressed by the 1997 Scientific 
Committee Meeting at Attachment W. 
 
 
 
 
It was also agreed that: 
a) 
the Third Annual Meeting would be resumed as soon as possible at a later date; 
 
b) 
each country would undertake the work required to complete steps 1 and 2, and when all parties 
 
agreed that the necessary preparatory work had been done, they will hold a workshop on steps 1 and 2; 
Short term 
SEC / ALL 
Sec to follow 
up progress 
Awaiting 
advice from 
members 
c) 
a workshop would be held on step 3—experimental design; 
d) 
a meeting of the Working Group on Ecologically Related Species would be held; 
e) 
a workshop on Management Strategy would be held; 
Medium 
term 
 
Date to be set 
after 
resumption of 
CCSBT 3 
 
f) 
a workshop to improve the Scientific Committee process, based on the issues at Attachment U, would 
 
also be held. 
 
However, the timing and priorities for a) to f) had yet to be agreed and it was not clear if all could be held 
before the next Annual Meeting. 
Medium 
term 
 
To follow up 
at resumption 
of CCSBT 3 
placed on 
preliminary 
agenda 
 
 
* Priority 
 
Short term  
 
two months 
Medium term 
 
2 - 6 months 
Long term  
 
6 -12 months 
 
 
No. 
Other Secretariat Action 
Status 
1 
Prepare a periodical report to members of action taken on major issues 
First report sent 29/10/96.  Intended to send bimonthly 
at this stage 
2 
Draft annotated agenda for CCSBT 3 resumed meeting 
Drafts sent to HOD’s 29/10/96, 7/1/97 & 30/1/97 
3 
Draft annotated agenda for CCSBT 4 
Completed - to be reviewed after the close of CCSBT 3 
4 
Seek written response to invitation to Indonesia to join the CCSBT 
Correspondence received from Indonesia stating their 
desire to remain as a non-Convention member.  Further 
letter from Chair sent 25/10/96.  Reminder fax sent 
7/1/97. 
5 
Seek written response to invitation to Korea to join CCSBT 
Letter proposing a meeting with Korean representatives 
re: membership sent 19/11/96.  Reminder fax sent 
7/1/97.  Response from Korea received 21/1/97. 
6 
Consider options on status of Taiwan in regard to the CCSBT 
Preliminary options developed - Sec seeking information 
on the status of Taiwan in other international 
arrangements 
7 
Compile a set of CCSBT formal documents, eg. Convention, Staff and Finance Regulations 
Copies distributed to members 
8 
Make arrangements with the Australian National Audit Office to undertake an independent audit of the 
Commission’s accounts. 
Formal approval from Minister received 20/1/97.  
Formal Commission approval being sought. 
9 
Develop an agreed set of procedures for approving expenditure from the CCSBT budget 
Sent to HOD for consideration 31/12/96. Responses 
received from Japan and New Zealand. 
10 
Develop a document detailing the history of the Commission 
In Progress 
11 
Develop a summary document on the CCSBT, in handout form 
First draft prepared 
12 
Hold periodic meetings between the Chair, Head of Australian Delegation, Japanese Embassy officials and 
New Zealand High Commission officials. 
First meeting held 19 November 1996 
13 
Translation of the Report from first session of CCSBT 3 
First draft completed 
14 
Develop a CCSBT Internet Home Page 
In Progress 
 
 
No. 
Other Secretariat Action 
Status 
15 
Selection of a CCSBT Logo 
Fax sent to HOD 2/1/97 seeking design finalisation.  
Preferred designs being refined by graphic designer.  
16 
Develop a policy of confidentiality of Commission documents 
Sent to HOD for consideration 31/12/96. Responses 
received from Japan and New Zealand. 
17 
IUCN Resolution on Seabird Bycatch 
Draft response distributed to HOD for consideration on 
14/1/97 
18 
Draft a public declaration, in consultation with member representatives, regarding Korea. 
 
19 
Selection of Deputy Executive Secretary 
Selection finalised 6 February 1997 
 
Attachment D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attachment E 
 
Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna Recommendations 
Relating to Ecologically Related Species, 
Especially the Incidental Mortality of Seabirds by Longline Fishing 
 
 
The Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT), at its 
resumed session of the 3rd annual meeting: 
 
Recalling the provisions of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 
(UNCLOS), in Article 61, paragraph 4, relating to the obligations of coastal States and 
States fishing on the high seas to consider the effects of fishing on "species associated 
with or dependant upon harvested species with a view to maintaining or restoring 
populations of such associated or dependant species above levels at which their 
reproduction may become seriously threatened", and Article 119, paragraph 1 (b). 
 
Also recalling that the United Nations Agreement for the Implementation of the 
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and 
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, in Article 5, which requires coastal States and States 
fishing on the high seas to "minimise pollution, waste, discards, catch by lost or 
abandoned gear, catch of non-target species, both fish and non-fish species, (herein after 
referred to as non-target species) and impacts on associated or dependent species, in 
particular endangered species, through measures including, to the extent practicable, the 
development and use of selective, environmentally safe and cost effective fishing gear 
and techniques", 
 
recommended that the Parties to the Convention: 
 
 
Data and Information Collection 
 
I. 
continue existing information collection on the nature and extent of ERS captures 
 
in southern bluefin tuna fishing operations;  
 
II. develop a set of questions for the ERSWG to address;  
 
III. should collect data concerning the incidental catch of seabirds and information 
 
concerning the state and trend of the seabird population subjected to incidental 
 
catch in cooperation with appropriate international organisations, other States and 
 
entities concerned; 
 
 
Mitigation Measures 
 
IV. promote the use of appropriately designed and deployed tori lines in SBT longline 
 
fishing operations;  
 
V. test the economic viability/effectiveness of the use of night setting in SBT longline 
 
fishing operations; 
 
VI. consider the promotion of mitigation measures, either singly or as a suite, as they 
 
are developed, refined or shown to be effective, in fishing operations where the 
 
incidental capture of seabirds occurs; 
 
VII. take the following measures, as appropriate, in longline fisheries while taking 
 
southern bluefin tuna: 
 
 
A. avoid the dumping of offal as far as possible while longlines are being set or 
 
 
hauled; 
 
 
B. use thawed baits. 
 
VIII. note the following measures accelerate the sinking rate of hooks: 
 
 
A. the weighting of the mainline, branchline or hooks;  
 
 
B. a machine which casts line outside of the screw track [bait thrower];  
 
 
C. thawed baits should be used; 
 
IX. should make every effort to ensure that birds captured alive during longlining are 
 
released alive and that wherever possible hooks are removed without jeopardising 
 
the life of the bird concerned; 
 
X. shall exchange information concerning new or refined techniques to reduce 
 
incidental catch of seabirds and cooperate in developing and assessing the 
 
effectiveness of such techniques, including those with the objective of preventing 
 
the approach of seabirds to fishing vessels or restraining the feeding activities of 
 
seabirds: 
 
 
 
in introducing a technique, consider its effectiveness in reducing the incidental 
 
 
catch of ERS, and the costs and benefits, including possible impacts on  
 
 
harvesting of tuna; 
 
XI. shall continue to assess the effectiveness of the measures described in the points 
 
above; 
 
 
Educational Material and Information Dissemination  
 
XII. shall promote, among the fishers concerned, understanding about the incidental 
 
capture of seabirds and measures which can be implemented to reduce seabird 
 
capture in longline operations. To this end, an education and information 
 
dissemination program for the fishers of Parties should be developed by the 
 
Commission. The programme should contain best practice guidelines on reducing 
 
incidental catch of ERS species; 
 
XIII. encourage non-parties engaging in longline fishing taking SBT to implement the 
 
measures, as agreed by the Commission, to reduce the incidental capture of 
 
seabirds; 
 
XIV. develop a set of educational material to be made available to the general public 
 
about the incidental capture of seabirds in southern bluefin tuna operations and 
 
steps the Commission is taking to reduce the incidental capture of seabirds in SBT 
 
longline fisheries; 
 
XV. request the Secretariat to circulate copies of ERS Working Group reports, once they 
 
become public documents, to appropriate international organisations to heighten 
 
international awareness of the efforts of both the Commission and its Parties to 
 
reduce incidental captures of seabirds in SBT longline fisheries; 
 
XVI. request the Secretariat to distribute copies of the booklet "Catching Fish Not 
 
Birds-A Guide to Improving Your Longline Fishing Efficiency" produced by Nigel 
 
Brothers of the Parks and Wildlife Service, Tasmania for the information of the 
 
fishing industries of the three Parties pending advice from the Secretariat on 
 
associated costs; 
 
XVII. request the Executive Secretary to bring these recommendations to the attention 
 
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Chairman of the CSD of the 
 
UN, the Director-General of the FAO of the UN, the Secretary of the IOTC, the 
 
Executive Secretary of the ICCAT, the Executive Secretary of CCAMLR, and the 
 
Director-General of the IUCN and other similar bodies; 
 
 
Conservation Work 
 
XVIII. invite/request the range states of seabirds, especially albatrosses, to investigate 
 
the causes of historic decline in seabird populations, if any, and take appropriate 
 
measures to protect and help recovery of the populations. Furthermore, in the 
 
case where habitat of those seabirds exist within their national boundary, the Parties 
 
invite relevant organisations in their country to implement appropriate management 
 
measures. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attachment F 
 
Draft 
 
Questions For the Ecologically Related Species Working Group 
 
February 1997 
 
 
The Commission requests the Ecologically Related Species Working Group (ERSWG) 
to address the following questions and issues: 
 
SEABIRDS 
 
 
Research Priorities  
 
I. 
What are the priorities for research on ecologically related species among the 
 
research requirements identified in Appendix 6 of the report from first meeting of 
 
the ERSWG? 
 
 
Improved understanding of the interaction between fishing operations and 
 
seabirds 
 
II. What is the nature and extent of the incidental seabird mortality in SBT and other 
 
relevant fisheries including the development of best estimates of incidental capture 
 
of seabirds in longline fisheries in southern waters? 
 
 
A. Review the collection of information on historical seabird mortality by area,  
 
season, time and species. 
 
 
B. Examine measures to collect data on seabird mortality including the incidental 
 
 
catch by SBT and other relevant fisheries. 
 
 
C. Determine the level and type of data required to obtain reliable estimates of 
 
 
incidental catch of seabird species. 
 
 
D. Determine the level and type of information currently collected on the  
 
 
 
incidental capture of seabirds in SBT. 
 
 
E. Identify additional data which should be collected to enable reliable estimates 
 
 
of incidental catch of seabird species to be obtained. 
 
 
F. 
Define appropriate standards and methods for the collection of data and  
 
 
samples. 
 
III. Which seabird species caught in SBT fishing operations are of particular concern? 
 
IV. To what extent do non-SBT fisheries and non-fishing related factors impact seabird 
 
species as identified in the above question? 
 
V. To what extent does seabird mortality caused by the SBT fisheries and other 
 
relevant fisheries contribute to the decline of seabird populations? 
 
 
A. Estimate the level of mortality of seabird species taken incidentally by SBT 
 
 
fisheries, identify the causes of that mortality and estimate the relative  
 
 
 
contribution of each cause. 
 
 
B. Determine the level of reliability of the estimates mentioned in V a) above. 
 
 
C. Investigate means to improve the reliability of these estimates. 
 
 
Seabird Population Trends 
 
VI. Review the information available on current overall abundance and recent trends in 
 
abundance for populations of seabirds that are incidentally caught in the SBT 
 
fishery. 
 
 
Mitigation Measures  
 
VII. Develop sets of specifications for tori poles and streamer lines which most 
 
effectively reduce the incidental capture of seabirds for the different types of 
 
longline vessels fishing for SBT.  New question - NZ 
 
VIII. What are the most effective and practical ways of minimising impacts of the SBT 
 
fishery on seabird populations? 
 
 
A. Determine methods to assess the effectiveness of mitigation measures and  
 
 
their effects on fishing operations when used. 
 
 
B. Develop guidelines for the most effective use of mitigation measures. 
 
IX. What information and analyses are available on mitigation measures, including the 
 
effectiveness of those measures in reducing seabird bycatch and their effect on 
 
catch of target species? 
 
X. How effective is night setting in reducing incidental capture of seabirds, and what 
 
are the costs, benefits and impact on catch of target species? 
 
 
Evaluate the costs and benefits of implementing nightsetting, including an 
 
assessment of the impact which the catch of target species? 
 
 
Educational and Information Dissemination 
 
XI. Which groups, including fishers, international organisations and countries, would 
 
benefit most from efforts to provide information on the mitigation of incidental 
 
seabird captures in SBT fisheries? 
 
XII. What information would be best provided to the groups identified in the question 
 
above to assist in mitigating incidental seabird capture in SBT fisheries?  In what 
 
format should this information be presented? 
 
XIII. What practical information would be best provided to fishers to assist in: the 
 
mitigation of incidental seabird capture; reduction in interactions; and engineering
 
and operational solutions? 
 
OTHER INCIDENTALLY TAKEN SPECIES 
 
13. What is the nature and extent of information on the incidental take of non-teleost 
 
species, in particular sharks, in SBT fisheries? 
 
14. What is the relationship between SBT abundance and their prey species 
 
abundance? 
 
15. What is the relationship between SBT abundance and predator species abundance? 
 
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
16. What additional data or other information are required to address the preceding 
 
questions and issues? 
 
Attachment G 
 
FINANCIAL RULES ESTABLISHED BY THE EXECUTIVE SECRETARY 
UNDER REGULATION 9.1 OF THE FINANCIAL REGULATIONS 
 
 
GENERAL BUDGET CONTROL 
 
1. 
During a financial year, the Executive Secretary shall refer to the Chair of the 
CCSBT or, if the Chair is not available, the Vice Chair, any variations between budget 
items up to 10% of the item being increased, or $500.00, whichever is the greater, for 
approval provided there is no overall increase in the estimates of total expenditure for 
that year. Any variation between items above that level or any increase in total 
expenditure require approval of the Commission. 
 
STAFF AND CONSULTANT/CONTRACTOR ARRANGEMENTS 
 
2. 
The Commission shall approve staff numbers (temporary and permanent) and the 
relative levels of remuneration in the budget approved at the Annual Meeting or 
out-of-session as the occasion arises. 
 
3. 
The Executive Secretary shall determine the actual remuneration for local staff 
within levels approved by the Commission. 
 
4. 
The Commission shall approve the employment of contract personnel and 
consultants where the cost is in excess of $10,000 for each contract, noting that quotes 
or similar inquiries need to be obtained for expenditure over $1,000. 
 
TRAVEL 
 
5. 
The Commission shall approve overseas travel for Commission staff, noting that 
travel conditions are set by the Staff Regulations (ie. economy air travel) and 
allowances determined in accordance with UN rates. 
 
6. 
The Chair of the CCSBT or if the Chair is not available the Vice Chair shall 
approve domestic travel for Commission staff. 
 
OTHER EXPENDITURE 
 
7. 
The Chair of the CCSBT or if the Chair is not available the Vice Chair shall; 
approve expenditure on an individual item in excess of $5,000 but which is within 
budget estimates. 
 
 
20 February 1997 
 
Attachment H 
 
 
 
  February 1997 
 
Mr David McDowell 
Director General 
IUCN 
Rue Mauverney 28 
CH-1196 Gland 
SWITZERLAND 
 
Dear Mr McDowell 
 
I have been advised that at the first World Conservation Congress (IUCN) in Canada in 
October 1996, a resolution was adopted about the incidental mortality of seabirds in 
longline fisheries. 
 
This resolution is of particular interest to the Commission for the Conservation of 
Southern Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT) and its member parties because a large proportion of 
Southern Bluefin Tuna (SBT) is caught in longline operations. In this letter we will 
outline the responsibilities and work of the Commission with respect to the incidental 
capture of seabirds in SBT fishing operations, provide comments on the IUCN 
resolution on seabird bycatch and seek information on how the Commission may liaise 
with the IUCN on relevant issues in the future. 
 
Although the objective of the Convention for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin 
Tuna is to ensure, through appropriate management, the conservation and optimum 
utilisation of SBT, the Convention recognises Ecologically Related Species (ERS).  
ERS are defined in the Convention as "living marine species which are associated with 
Southern Bluefin Tuna, including but not restricted to both predators and prey of 
Southern Bluefin Tuna". This includes seabirds incidentally caught in SBT fishing 
operations. 
 
The Convention provides for CCSBT parties to collect, provide and exchange relevant 
information on ERS. In addition, the Commission recognises its responsibilities with 
respect to reducing the incidental capture of seabirds in SBT fishing operations. 
 
In order to address its responsibilities, the Commission has established an Ecologically 
Related Species Working Group (ERSWG). The Terms of Reference for the ERSWG 
(attached) provide for the group to advise the Commission on issues including trends 
in the population biology of ERS, factors affecting those populations, the effects which 
SBT and other fisheries have on ERS and measures which could be used to minimise 
the effects of SBT fishing operations on ERS. We are pleased to attach a copy of the 
first report of the ERSWG which supports some of the statements made in the IUCN 
resolution on seabird bycatch including: 
 
• 
at least 13 species of seabirds are being caught in longline operations; 
• 
incidental mortality from longline fishing has contributed to declines in some 
 
populations of seabirds; 
• 
the need for international cooperation, and 
• 
the identification of a number of measures which can be used to reduce seabird 
 
mortality. 
 
With respect to international cooperation, the CCSBT and the Commission for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources have exchanged information on 
work each undertakes in the area of incidental seabird captures in fishing operations. 
 
At its third Annual Meeting the Commission made a decision to address the incidental 
capture of ERS in SBT fisheries, especially the incidental catch of seabirds by longline 
fishing. We attach a copy of this decision for your information from which you will see 
that the Commission recommends that the use of appropriately designed and deployed 
tori lines in SBT longline fishing operations be promoted, and encourages its parties, 
as appropriate, to avoid the dumping of offal as far as possible while longlines are 
being set or hauled. Further, the Commission will develop educational material for 
distribution among fishers of SBT to promote the use of appropriate measures to 
reduce the incidental capture of seabirds in SBT fisheries. 
 
We note that the IUCN resolution focuses on incidental captures of seabirds in longline 
operations as a source of mortality for seabirds. The CCSBT acknowledges that 
longlining is a cause of mortality for many seabird species but notes in some 
circumstances other factors may also contribute to seabird mortality. 
 
The CCSBT believes that for vulnerable seabird populations, work should be done to 
reduce both longline and non-longline sources of mortality. The Commission hopes to 
see the early implementation of management measures to reduce mortality from 
non-longlining sources. 
 
With increasing public interest in marine conservation, other issues of relevance to the 
CCSBT are likely to arise within the IUCN programme in the future. We would 
welcome the opportunity to liaise with the IUCN and would appreciate your advice on 
arrangements that could be made with your organisation to facilitate CCSBT 
participation in and consultation on matters of mutual interest. 
 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
 
 
 
 
Campbell McGregor 
Executive Secretary 
 
Attachment I 
 
  February 1997 
 
I refer again to your recent letter concerning the taking of southern bluefin tuna. 
 
Southern bluefin tuna (SBT) is a highly migratory species which travels through the Indian, 
Pacific, Southern and southern Atlantic Oceans. It can pass through the fishery zones of a 
number of States but most of its life is spent in waters outside the control of any one 
country. Fleets from Australia, Japan and New Zealand have been fishing for SBT for 
many years and these countries are collaborating, through the Commission for the 
Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna, on SBT research, and the development and 
implementation of management strategies for the recovery and sustainable use of this 
valuable resource. 
 
While these three countries are actively working to promote a responsible approach to 
sustainable fishing, fleets from other States and entities have been increasing their catches 
of SBT thereby reducing the effectiveness of the Commission's management efforts. The 
Commission is liaising with those States and entities to encourage their participation in its 
management programs. 
 
Scientists are continuing to refine their assessments and identify options to effectively 
conserve and manage the SBT stock, for consideration by the Commission. Recent 
assessments suggest existing management actions have averted stock decline. 
 
The Commission notes that your concerns are based, to a large extent, on the fact that SBT 
has been listed by the IUCN as critically endangered. It should be understood that the 
IUCN classification for SBT is qualified by the caveat that the criteria used for the 
assessment do not always lead to equally robust assessments of extinction risk, which 
depend upon the life history of the species. IUCN also recognised that the quantitative 
criterion (used for SBT) may not be appropriate for assessing the risk of extinction for 
some species, particularly those with high reproductive potential, fast growth and broad 
geographic ranges. Many of these species have high potential for population maintenance 
under high levels of mortality, and such species might form the basis for sustainable 
fisheries. 
 
While the Commission acknowledges that the stock of SBT is currently at a level requiring 
rebuilding, it does not believe that the available scientific evidence justifies suspension of 
fishing. The Commission has established catch limits and other management measures to 
conserve the stock and is now actively working to develop a robust and comprehensive 
management strategy for stock recovery. The Commission will continue to refine the 
scientific assessments of the stock. These management strategies will be developed in the 
light of those assessments to ensure that the Commission's objective is achieved.  
 
Yours sincerely 
 
 
Campbell McGregor 
Executive Secretary 
Attachment J 
 
CCSBT COMMUNIQUE ON NON-MEMBER FISHING ACTIVITIES 
 
 
The Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT), which was 
formally established in May 1994 to provide an international forum for the conservation, 
management and optimum utilisation of southern bluefin tuna (SBT), is urging other 
countries who fish SBT to a significant level to join the Commission, and fishing 
entities to cooperate by applying SBT conservation and management measures. 
 
The United Nations Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish 
Stocks establishes that the long term viability of stocks can only be effectively secured 
if countries become members of, or in the case of fishing entities cooperate in applying, 
the conservation and management measures established by regional fisheries 
management organisations, in this instance the CCSBT. 
 
The current Commission members, Australia, Japan and New Zealand, have developed 
and implemented strict controls on the taking of SBT in order to rebuild the stock.  
Members of the Commission are required to set a Total Allowable Catch, which for the 
year 1996/97 is 11,750 tonnes. However, the benefits of these conservation measures 
are being eroded by non-member fishing fleets not only continuing to fish but in some 
instances increasing their catches of SBT in recent years. Reported catches of non 
members were in excess of 3,000 tonnes in 1996. 
 
The Commission regrets that the restrictions imposed on the fleets of member countries 
are being undermined by the actions of fleets from non-members and again calls upon 
those countries and fishing entities to acknowledge and participate in the stock 
rebuilding programme. In the case of non-members currently taking significant SBT 
catch, the Commission strongly believes they should accede to the Convention or 
cooperate by applying the Commission's conservation and management measures and 
thereby contribute to a more rapid recovery of the stock. The Commission will pursue, 
(as a matter of high priority), further discussions with non-member SBT fishing nations 
and entities with a view to securing this participation, as required by Article 15∗1 of the 
Convention for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna. 
 
The Commission requests: 
 
1. 
That as a matter of priority non-members actively limit their catch of SBT; 
 
2. 
That non-members as soon as possible accede to the Convention for the 
 
Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna, or cooperate by applying the 
 
Commission's conservation and management measures; 
 
3. 
That non-members provide accurate SBT fishing data to the Commission. 
 
ENDS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact: Dr Alison Turner, Chair, CCSBT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
∗1  Article 15 of the Convention for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna: 
 
1. 
The Parties agree to invite the attention of any State or entity not party to this Convention to any 
matter relating to the fishing activities of its nationals, residents or vessels which could affect the 
attainment of the objective of this Convention. 
 
2. 
Each Party shall encourage its nationals not to associate with the southern bluefin tuna fishery of 
any State or entity not party to this Convention, where such association could affect adversely the 
attainment of the objective of this Convention. 
 
3. 
Each Party shall take appropriate measures aimed at preventing vessels registered under its laws and 
regulations from transferring their registration for the purpose of avoiding compliance with the 
provisions of this Convention or measures adopted pursuant to it. 
 
4. 
The Parties shall cooperate in taking appropriate action, consistent with international law and their 
respective domestic laws, to deter fishing activities for southern bluefin tuna by nationals, residents 
or vessels of any State or entity not party to this Convention where such activity could affect 
adversely the attainment of the objective of this Convention. 
Attachment K 
 
DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE STANDING COMMITTEE FOR 
FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION 
 
 
1. 
There shall be a Standing Committee for Finance and Administration on which 
 
each Member of the Commission may be represented by no more than three 
 
representatives, together with such advisers as are necessary; the Committee shall 
 
elect its own Chair; 
 
2. 
The Committee shall examine the operation of the budget for the current year and 
 
advise the Commission, as appropriate, on expenditure trends; 
 
3. 
The Committee shall examine and make recommendations to the Commission on 
 
the draft budget for the ensuing year and the scale of contributions required from 
 
Members; 
 
4. 
The Committee shall advise the Commission on staff questions, on publications of 
 
the Commission and such other matters as the Commission may refer to it from 
 
time to time; and 
 
5. 
The Committee may draw to the attention of the Commission any matter of a 
 
financial or administrative nature. 
 
 
20 February 1997 
 
Attachment L 
 
Revised Work Program for the CCSBT 
 
 
Dates 
 
Number 
of Days 
Venue 
18–21 Feb 1997 
Resumed Third Annual 
Commission Meeting — 
sets TAC and national allocations for 
1996–97 at 1995–96 levels 
 
Canberra 
 
12 May 1997 
Work on non-parties 
 
 
13–16 May 1997 
Scientific Process Workshop —
including finalising Scientific 
Committee Rules of Procedure 
4 days 
tba1 (Blue 
Mountains?) 
5 May 1997 
Exchange of fishery data 
 
 
 
12 weeks preparatory work and 
exchange of inputs for Scientific 
Committee work on steps 1 & 2 
 
 
3–5 Jun 1997 
ERS Working Group Meeting —
reports to CCSBT4 
3 days 
Australia 
28 Jul – 8 Aug 
1997 
Scientific Committee Meeting — 
collaborative work on steps 1 & 2, 
including VPA modelling 
10 days 
Australia 
8–13 Sep 1997 
Fourth CCSBT Meeting 
5 days 
Canberra 
 
Consideration of outcomes from 
Scientific Committee meeting 
on steps 1 & 2 
 
 
 
Decision on whether to proceed with 
further work on experimental fishing 
(full scale or pilot program) 
 
 
 
TAC for 1997–98 set on basis of 
1996 stock assessment and outcomes 
from 1997 Scientific Committee 
work on steps 1 & 2 
 
 
Late 1997 and 
first half of 1998 
Step 3 work 
(full scale or pilot — if agreed at 
CCSBT4) 
Tba 
tba 
27–30 Oct 1997 
Management Strategy Workshop 
4 days 
tba 
 
Option of Special Commission 
Meeting, dependent on successful 
completion of step 3 
 
 
1998 
Scientific Committee Meeting —  
Full stock assessment 
 
Japan 
1998 
Fifth Annual Commission Meeting 
 
Japan 
 
                                                 
1 tba = to be advised 
