Commission for the Conservation of 
Southern Bluefin Tuna 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the Fourth Annual Meeting 
Third Part 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 – 21 February 1998 
Canberra, Australia 
 
 
1
Report of the Fourth Annual Meeting 
Third Part 
19 – 21 February 1998 
Canberra, Australia 
 
 
The representatives of the Governments of Australia, Japan and New Zealand 
reconvened the Fourth Annual Meeting of the Commission for the Conservation of 
Southern Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT4(3)) from 19 to 21 February 1998. 
 
Agenda Item 1: Opening of Meeting 
 
1.1 Welcoming Address 
 
The Chair, Mr Royce Elliott of New Zealand, welcomed delegates from Australia, Japan 
and New Zealand, and observers from the Republic of Indonesia, the Republic of Korea, 
Taiwan, the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 
(CCAMLR) and the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas 
(ICCAT). 
 
The Chair invited the observers to make comments on particular issues as they arose 
during the agenda. 
 
1.2 Adoption of the Agenda 
 
The agreed agenda and list of participants are at Attachments A and B. 
 
1.3 Appointment of Rapporteurs 
 
Rapporteurs were appointed as follows: for Australia, Mr Barrington and Ms Wallace, 
for Japan, Mr Komatsu and Mr Morishita, and for New Zealand, Ms Robinson and Dr 
Murray. 
 
Opening Statements 
 
Japan did not make an opening statement. 
Australia’s opening statement is included as Attachment C. 
New Zealand’s opening statement is included as Attachment D. 
 
Agenda Item 2: Total Allowable Catch and Quota Allocations 
 
New Zealand stated that because of the depleted status of the stock, any increases in 
catch, by whatever mechanism, posed a real risk to the SBT stock and therefore to the 
members' common interest in a viable SBT fishery. New Zealand referred to the duty of 
conservation under UNCLOS and to the UNIA which sets out the basic principles of the 
precautionary approach. Given the level of uncertainty associated with stock projections 
catch increases would be contrary to the precautionary approach (States shall be more 
cautious when information is uncertain). 
 
2
 
New Zealand acknowledged the problems of over capitalisation and poor market returns 
which created economic pressures for the Japanese industry. However, on balance, stock 
sustainability was the key consideration. 
 
Australia noted that the CCSBT Convention, UNCLOS and UNIA all demand that 
Commission members work together to set catch levels that are sustainable. The SBT 
stock remains depleted to levels at which recruitment may be subject to wide variations 
and stock recovery is uncertain. Australia's preparedness to accept maintaining the 
global TAC and national allocations at 1997 levels reflected a pragmatic response to the 
differences that currently exist between the members. Australia had already committed 
to restraining its catch to within limits most recently agreed by the Commission, and 
urged other members to do the same. 
 
Japan stated that its position remained unchanged from that of January 1998. Japan 
believed the results of its scientists indicate an increase in catch of 3000t is sustainable.  
Past agreement by Japan to maintaining current TAC and national allocations had not 
been based on an agreed scientific assessment but had been a political compromise on 
Japan's part to secure its fishing operations within the Australian 200 nautical mile zone.  
Japan was concerned that such arbitrary setting of the TAC by the Commission without 
agreed scientific evidence undermined optimal utilisation of SBT. In Japan's view, the 
Commission had not acted for years to attain the objective of optimum utilisation of 
SBT stock stipulated in the Convention. Japan expressed its concerns on the linkage 
between the setting of TAC at the CCSBT and access to Australian waters, as it 
considered that there was no strong connection between the two issues. 
 
New Zealand noted that the biomass of the SBT stock was well below the minimum 
level recognised internationally as acceptable for supporting sustainable utilisation.  
Even the target stock level of 1980 parental biomass levels agreed by the Commission 
was only 20 per cent of the unexploited biomass level. Current adult biomass is assessed 
to be between one quarter and one third of the 1980 level. New Zealand was also 
concerned at Japan's reliance on stock projections (demonstrated in retrospect to be 
consistently optimistic) to support an increase in TAC. Under such circumstances, New 
Zealand considered it irresponsible, and clearly inconsistent with the precautionary 
approach, for the Commission to consider an increase in TAC. 
 
Australia stressed that individual members had a responsibility to industry, and to the 
Commission, to take measures to ensure stock recovery, and thereby ensure a viable 
future for the industry. Australia agreed with New Zealand that an increase in the TAC 
would not be consistent with sustainable management of the SBT stock and remained 
concerned that Japan was continuing to seek an increase in the TAC. The primary task 
of the Commission is to set sustainable quotas for SBT. Australia stated that unless 
responsible quotas were set by the Commission, Australia considered that, as a 
responsible Commission member, it should take measures so as not to facilitate 
activities which undermine the effectiveness of the Convention. Australia noted that 
access to its fishing waters and ports would be available only to countries which have 
agreed to national catch limits within the CCSBT. Australia reaffirmed its commitment 
to continue to negotiate to reach a resolution on a TAC and national allocations for this 
 
3
year. 
 
No agreement on the TAC was reached at the meeting. Australia and New Zealand again 
undertook to restrain their respective national allocations to the levels last agreed by the 
Commisssion for 1996/97 (5,265 t and 420 t respectively). They felt this was the only 
responsible action in the absence of a decision by the Commision, and urged Japan to 
act similarly. 
 
Japan undertook to restrain its commercial SBT catch to 6,065 t, its national allocation 
for 1996/97. However, Japan would also implement an EFP in 1998 using catch in 
addition to 6,065 t. 
 
New Zealand and Australia questioned the authority under the Convention for Japan's 
decision to take SBT in addition to the level of its former national allocation. 
 
In the absence of a decision to set a TAC for 1997/98, national allocations were not set. 
 
Agenda Item 3: Consideration of an Experimental Fishing Program 
 
The Chair noted that a revised Joint Pilot Plan for Experimental Fishing Program for 
SBT (CCSBT/9709/22) had been submitted by Japan in January 1997 before  CCSBT 
3(2). 
 
Japan advised that, in light of a lack of collaboration in its view by Australia and New 
Zealand to constructively consider and approve the EFP since 1995, and because Japan 
believed exhaustive efforts had been exercised to achieve consensus within the 
Commission, that Japan was preparing to implement an EFP unilaterally under the 
responsibility of Government of Japan, commencing in June 1998. While the basic 
framework for the proposed EFP would be along the lines of CCSBT/9709/22, Japan 
advised that it was currently considering a further revision of the program. In order to 
ensure the transparency of the EFP Japan would notify the other members of the final 
program design around mid-May 1998. Japan said it was also willing to accept any 
constructive comments from the other members and it further stated it would welcome 
their participation in the implementation of the EFP, including observers from the other 
members for high seas operation. 
 
In response to a number of queries from Australia and New Zealand, Japan confirmed 
that its current pilot plan as set out in CCSBT 9709/22: 
- 
would involve conducting an EFP on a unilateral basis under the responsibility of 
 
Government of Japan from June to August 1998 in Statistical Area 8; 
- 
would involve 2,010 t of catch of SBT each year over three years above Japan’s 
 
1996/97 national allocation of 6,065 t; and 
- 
if the pilot EFP were shown to have an adverse effect on the stock Japan would 
 
reduce its national allocation in subsequent years to pay back the SBT catch taken 
 
under the pilot plan. 
 
Australia and New Zealand expressed their strong concern that the Japanese EFP 
proposal did not specify the means by which adverse effects would be assessed, nor the 
 
4
decision rules for any consequent management response. 
 
Japan also stated that it would introduce necessary measures to ensure the transparency 
of the research, e.g. observers, VMS, enforcement vessels, separation of the research 
from commercial operations by separating catch and operations and submission of 
reports to the Scientific Committee. 
 
Japan stated that the EFP's objective was to evaluate the CPUE models based on data 
from the areas and period from which data have not been available due to shrinkage of 
fishery grounds to resolve the uncertainty surrounding the CPUE hypotheses, including 
Variable Square Hypothesis (VSH) and Constant Square Hypothesis (CSH), for stock 
assessment. Japan considered that an EFP as detailed in CCSBT/9709/22 would allow 
the elimination of the VSH which in Japan's view would reduce the uncertainty of the 
future projection of the SBT stock level by 50 per cent. 
 
Japan considered that if an EFP did not increase the estimate of the possibility of 
recovery of the SBT stock through the elimination of the VSH, it would consider the 
EFP a failure and would initiate a further EFP. 
 
Australia stressed its concern about the underlying logic of the proposal, and that the 
experiment was designed to lead to a predetermined outcome, based on a 
misunderstanding of how CPUE is treated in the stock assessment. Australia did not 
consider that the pilot plan showed the extent to which an EFP would resolve or reduce 
the level the uncertainty in the stock assessment for SBT. 
 
New Zealand shared Australia’s concerns over the ability of the Japanese-designed EFP 
to rule out the VSH. In New Zealand's view the current proposal for EFP is unlikely to 
resolve uncertainty in the current stock assessment, and, because it involves substantial 
fishing in the currently fished areas, seemed to be directed at commercial fishing 
objectives. It was also unclear from any available information that the CSH/VSH 
hypotheses were the most important sources of uncertainty to resolve. 
 
In response to a query from Japan, Australia outlined other mechanisms for reducing 
uncertainty in the stock assessment, i.e. 
- 
tagging of SBT to estimate natural mortality rates; 
- 
tagging of SBT in order to derive absolute estimates of abundance and fishing 
 
mortality; 
- 
increased observer coverage to get better information from tagging experiments 
 
and on CPUE data; 
- 
direct ageing of the Indonesian SBT catch; 
- 
monitoring of non member catches (including by certification of trade in SBT); 
- 
fisheries surveys on the spawning ground; and 
- 
fishery independent studies such as aerial and acoustic surveys. 
 
New Zealand added that these research activities could be undertaken without additional 
catch which posed further risk to the stock. 
 
Japan stated its view that a number of these mechanisms outlined above had been in 
 
5
place for years and uncertainties are still unsolved by the Scientific Committee because 
of lack of reliable data and methodology. Although Japan did not deny the value of 
mechanisms stated, it did not believe that they would produce tangible results in the 
near future. 
 
In response to a query from Australia, Japan advised that in its view the preamble of the 
Convention provided, in its second last paragraph, a legal basis for conducting an EFP, 
specifically ‘Acknowledging the importance of scientific research for the conservation 
and management of southern bluefin tuna and the importance of collecting scientific 
information relating to southern bluefin and ecologically related species’. The 
paragraph states the importance of scientific work and becomes the basis for the 
program. Japan considered that a unilateral EFP was also consistent with Article 3 of the 
Convention which sets out the objective of the CCSBT as conservation and optimum 
utilisation of SBT. 
 
Australia considered that there was a strong obligation on Japan under the Convention 
to undertake an EFP only within a consensus framework and noted that the preamble 
simply states facts and does not provide a legal basis for actions. 
 
New Zealand considered there to be no authority under the Convention for Japan’s 
unilateral EFP. New Zealand was of the view that an unilateral EFP would be outside 
the scope of the Convention and referred in particular to decisions made on catch 
pursuant to Article 8 and Article 9(2). New Zealand observed that information collection 
and scientific collaboration pursuant to the Convention were only to occur by consensus. 
Without a Commission decision, and a rejection of attempts by members to develop a 
mutually acceptable EFP, Japan's actions will constitute pre-determined overfishing 
beyond the levels last agreed by the Commission and would be inconsistent with its 
obligations under Article 8. 
 
Australia and New Zealand provided Japan with detailed comments on the EFP 
(Attachments E and F). They asked that Japan consider their comments and work 
together with other Commission members to resolve the outstanding difficulties with 
the Japanese EFP proposal and to handle the EFP issues on a collaborative basis within 
the Commission. 
 
Australia and New Zealand emphasised that they remained prepared to consider a 
well-designed, scientifically credible EFP, which dealt adequately with questions of 
experimental design, risks to the stock, underlying logic, collaborative monitoring and 
analysis, and subsequent management responses. They considered that it was imperative 
that the Commission await the outcome of the peer review and the 1998 stock 
assessment before making a decision on EFP. 
 
Japan stated that it had supported the scientific peer review, but does not have any 
optimistic expectation for the review. Looking back, past failures of the Commission at 
the 1996 Stock Assessment Group, 1996 Step 1 & 2 Scientific Workshop, and 1997 
Scientific Committee, Japan believed that it is unrealistic to expect the solutions after 
four weeks of the review by scientists who have never been involved in the CCSBT 
process. 
 
6
 
Australia disagreed with Japan's comments on the Commission's prior scientific work 
and noted that the peer review would include consideration of the treatment and 
weighting of various inputs to the stock assessment and thereby assist the Commission's 
decision making process. Australia urged all members to support the peer review and its 
outcomes and noted the independence of the reviewers was a major strength as they 
would have no predetermined view on SBT issues. 
 
Japan maintained that the pilot plan would contribute to resolving the issue of the CPUE 
hypotheses, which is one of the major sources of uncertainty, had a built in pay-back 
system should this not occur, and that the EFP posed little risk to SBT stock. Although 
Japan considered that it had responded orally to almost all of the comments by Australia, 
Japan expressed its intention to consider the comments provided. Not withstanding this 
intention, Japan believed it was unavoidable to prepare for implementing the EFP on a 
unilateral basis. This was because Japan's past efforts to cooperate with other members 
to progress the matter of EFP had been repeatedly denied and produced no results.  
Japan also stated its view that the comments provided by Australia and New Zealand 
contained no specific details which would lead to improvements of the plan and 
requested clear counter proposals. 
 
Australia asked that Japan consider Australia's comments more thoroughly as they 
provided very specific suggestions for improving statistical design, scientific merit and 
underling premises of an EFP. 
 
Australia and New Zealand recorded very strong objections to Japan's expressed 
intention to pursue a unilateral EFP. They substantially challenged Japan's EFP proposal 
in terms of its statistical validity, underlying logic and scientific merit, as well as its 
legality under the Convention. 
 
Japan undertook to provide a written response to Australia's and New Zealand's written 
comments. Australia and New Zealand did not, however, consider that a written 
response from Japan would constitute development of a collaborative design. 
 
Agenda Item 4: Other Business 
 
4.1 Non-members 
 
The Commission recognised the importance of securing the cooperation or accession of 
non-members. 
 
New Zealand and Australia considered that restraint of non-member catch is critical to 
the future functioning of the Commission and the viability of the SBT fishery. 
 
Australia and New Zealand reaffirmed their commitment to the program of work 
relating to non-members developed at CCSBT4(2) and sought confirmation of dates for 
the direct approaches by Commission delegates to non-members. Japan also supported 
the action plan adopted at CCSBT4(2) and tentatively suggested either the last week of 
March or the first week of April 1998. Japan undertook to confirm dates and a 
 
7
representative as soon as possible. 
 
Non-member observers advised they were unable, at this time, to provide comment on 
the action plan distributed by the Commission at CCSBT4(2). 
 
4.2 Cooperation within the CCSBT 
 
New Zealand reported its concern about recent developments within the Commission 
which threaten the function of the Commission. As members of a regional management 
organisation within the regime of high seas fisheries under UNCLOS  and the UNIA, 
members of the CCSBT are required to conduct themselves in good faith, consistent 
with the duties of conservation and cooperation and the obligation to strengthen existing 
management organisations. 
 
New Zealand noted its disappointment that Japan: 
a) 
was seeking to increase its SBT catch despite the depleted stock status; 
b) 
intended to implement a unilateral EFP; 
c) 
had hindered active consideration of trade certification of SBT; 
d) had delayed progress on action to achieve the accession or cooperation of 
non-members; and, 
e) 
had made overt moves to seek transfer of SBT management to the IOTC despite the 
IOTC’s express statements that CCSBT has the mandate to manage SBT, and 
Japan's obligation to support CCSBT's management mandate. 
 
Individually, these approaches by Japan gave cause for serious concern. In combination 
these approaches led New Zealand to question whether this conduct demonstrated the 
level of commitment to Law of the Sea Convention principles that would be expected 
from a responsible fishing nation. These approaches by Japan provided New Zealand 
with grave concern for the ongoing function of the Commission and the future for SBT.  
New Zealand reaffirmed its commitment to the CCSBT, the principles of conservation 
and cooperation, and its intention to resolve difficulties within the framework of the 
Commission. 
 
Japan drew attention to its past efforts to support the CCSBT and reaffirmed its 
commitment to cooperate with Australia and New Zealand within the CCSBT.  
However, considering the current impasse of the organisation which leads in its view to 
the inability of functioning in accordance with the objective of the Convention, Japan 
considered that it may be appropriate to consider the option of transferring the 
management of SBT to another regional management organisation. As a responsible 
fishing nation and the largest fisher and market for SBT Japan believed it had a stronger 
interest than other members in the conservation and optimum utilisation of the SBT and 
consequently is prepared to take steps to improve the stock assessment. 
 
Australia noted the wide range of areas important to the Commission's objectives in 
which members can and do cooperate, including action on non-members and steps to 
improve the stock assessment. Although it is extremely frustrating that fishing outside 
the regime is exacerbating differences within the Commission. This meant that members 
should seek to strengthen the Convention and to find solutions within the Convention 
 
8
framework. Australia sought Japan’s commitment to defer consideration of its proposed 
EFP until the results of the scientific peer review were available, to address Australia 
and New Zealand’s comments on Japan’s proposal, and to discuss the results of those 
considerations at CCSBT5. 
 
4.3 Handling of the Report 
 
Japan expressed its concerns on the leakage of draft meeting reports to the media at 
CCSBT4(2) and the unauthorised distribution of an NGO pamphlet at the opening of 
CCSBT4(3). Australia and New Zealand were also concerned at leakage of information 
to the media during the course of a meeting. 
 
The Commission reaffirmed the need to take care during meetings to ensure the security 
and confidentiality of papers and draft meeting reports. The Commission also agreed a 
report of the Commission should be brief and succinct. 
 
4.4 Scientific process 
 
Scientists from the three members met to confirm the work program, timetable and 
general procedures for the 1998 stock assessment process (Attachment G). The 
arrangements developed by the scientists were agreed to by the Commission. 
 
Japan made several queries on the work program, and asked whether the Scientific 
Committee could achieve productive and fruitful progress including agreement on the 
uncertainty and stock assessment. It cast doubt on the 1998 scientific process in that it 
might repeat the impasses experienced in the past years. New Zealand responded it 
would make every effort to avoid this, but that it could not predict the outcome of the 
1998 scientific process. New Zealand proposed questions which the Commission could 
use to guide the deliberations of the Scientific Committee. These were circulated for 
comment (Attachment H) and supported by Australia. Japan asserted it was not 
reasonable for New Zealand to submit such a proposal at a late stage in the meeting and 
noted the necessity of clear rules for the submission of proposals and documents. 
 
Agenda Item 5: Close of the Meeting 
 
5.1 Election of Chair and Vice Chair for 1998 
 
Japan stated that it was appropriate to close CCSBT4 and nominated Mr Yasuo Takase 
of the Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Fisheries Division, for election as the new 
Chair of the Commission for CCSBT5. 
 
However, the meeting did not close and therefore elections did not occur. 
 
5.2 Adoption of the Report of the Meeting 
 
The meeting approved and adopted the report of the meeting. 
 
 
 
9
5.3 Closure of the Meeting 
 
All members thanked the Chair, Secretariat and interpreters for their support throughout 
the meeting. 
 
Japan noted that at this meeting there has been little agreement on the issues considered 
by the Commission. However, Japan hoped that in the future the CCSBT could function 
more effectively in the management of the SBT stock. Japan reported that it was not 
able to agree to many points because it was seeking to improvement of the organisation.  
Japan undertook to work hard in the future so the Commission will become a better 
international organisation. 
 
New Zealand noted its serious concern that significant issues that were the 
responsibility of the Commission remained unresolved. New Zealand reaffirmed its 
commitment to continue negotiating in good faith to resolve these issues. As no decision 
had been made to close the meeting, New Zealand looked forward to resumption of the 
adjourned meeting as soon as possible to resolve the outstanding issues. 
 
Australia viewed with great concern the fact that a TAC and national allocations for 
1997/98 had yet to be set by the Commission. All Commission members are parties to 
UNCLOS and, with others, have signed the UNIA, which reinforces their duty to 
cooperate to conserve the SBT stock. 
 
Australia stressed that the precautionary approach is firmly embedded as a norm for the 
international natural resource management. Outsiders looking at the Commission 
wondering why there had been no agreement on a TAC and national allocations would 
find two members prepared to apply the precautionary approach and take appropriate 
management action for addressing the very real concerns that apply when a stock is 
depleted to less than 10 per cent of unexploited biomass. 
 
Australia considered that in the absence of a decision on a TAC by the Commission, no 
member is free to fish, for any reason, to a level in excess of the national allocation last 
agreed by the Commission. Australia strongly urged Japan to resile from its expressed 
intention of implementing an EFP using catch in excess of its most recent national 
allocation (6,065t). Australia remained hopeful that Japan would return to the table to 
work in a collaborative way to resolve the outstanding issues of TAC, national 
allocations and experimental fishing. 
 
All members affirmed their commitment to continuing to seek the resolution of these 
issues. 
 
 
 
Royce Elliott 
Chair 
21 February 1998 
 
List of Attachments 
 
 
Attachment A  
Agenda 
Attachment B  
List of Participants 
Attachment C  
Opening Statement - Australia 
Attachment D  
Opening Statement - New Zealand 
Attachment E  
Australian Comments on Joint Pilot Plan for Experimental Fishing 
 
 
 
 
Program for SBT (CCSBT/9709/22) 
Attachment F  
New Zealand Comments on Joint Pilot Plan for Experimental Fishing 
 
 
 
 
Program for SBT (CCSBT/9709/22) 
Attachment G  
Facilitation of the 1998 Scientific Process 
Attachment H  
Possible Questions for the Managers to Pose to Scientists 
 
 
 
 
- a Proposal by New Zealand 
 
Attachment A 
 
AGENDA 
 
 
1. 
Opening of Meeting 
 
1.1 Welcoming Address 
 
1.2 Adoption of Agenda 
 
1.3 Appointment of Rapporteurs 
 
1.4 Meeting Arrangements 
 
2. 
Total Allowable Catch and Quota Allocation 
 
2.1 Total Allowable Catch 
 
2.2 National Allocations 
 
3. 
Consideration of an Experimental Fishing Program 
 
4. 
Other Business 
 
4.1 Non-members 
 
4.2 Cooperation within CCSBT 
 
4.3 Handling of the Report 
 
4.4 Scientific Process 
 
5. 
Close of the Meeting 
 
5.1 Election of Chair and Vice Chair for 1998 
 
5.2 Adoption of the Report of the Meeting 
 
5.3 Closure of the Meeting 
 
Attachment B 
 
List of Participants 
 
 
Chair 
 
Mr Royce ELLIOTT 
Ministry of Fisheries 
PO Box 1020 
Wellington 
New Zealand 
Phone: +64 4 470 2619 
Fax:  
+64 4 470 2669 
 
Australia 
 
Delegation 
 
Ms Mary HARWOOD 
(Head of Delegation) 
Assistant Secretary, Fisheries & 
Aquaculture Branch 
Petroleum & Fisheries Division 
Department of Primary Industries & 
Energy (DPIE) 
GPO Box 858 
Canberra ACT 2601 
Phone: +61 2 6272 5044 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4215 
Email: 
mary.harwood@dpie.gov.au 
 
Mr Neil HERMES 
(Alternate) 
Director, International Relations Section  
Fisheries & Aquaculture Branch 
DPIE 
GPO Box 858 
Canberra ACT 2601 
Phone: +61 2 6271 6396 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4215 
Email: 
neil.hermes@dpie.gov.au 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr Nick RAYNS 
(Alternate) 
Senior Manager, Tuna & Billfish 
Fisheries 
Australian Fisheries Management Authority 
(AFMA) 
PO Box 7051 
Canberra Mail Centre 
Canberra ACT 2610 
Phone: +61 2 6272 4812 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4614 
Email: 
nick.rayns@afma.gov.au 
 
Government Experts and Advisers 
 
Australian Fisheries Management 
Authority 
PO Box 7051 
Canberra Mail Centre 
Canberra ACT 2610 
 
Mr Peter NEAVE 
Senior Management Officer 
Western Tuna & Billfish Fishery 
Phone: +61 2 6272 5794 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4614 
Email: 
peter.neave@afma.gov.au 
 
Ms Joan LEARY 
Senior Management Officer 
Southern Bluefin Tuna Fisheries 
Phone: +61 2 6272 4442 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4614 
Email: 
joan.leary@afma.gov.au 
 
Mr Matt GLEESON 
Senior Management Officer 
Compliance Programs 
Phone: +61 2 6272 5698 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4614 
Email: 
matt.gleeson@afma.gov.au 
 
 
Department of Primary Industries and 
Energy 
GPO Box 858 
Canberra ACT 2601 
 
Mr John HARTWELL 
First Assistant Secretary 
Petroleum & Fisheries Division 
Phone: +61 2 6272 4480 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 5542 
Email: 
john.hartwell@dpie.gov.au 
 
Mr Jonathon BARRINGTON 
Assistant Director 
International Relations Section 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Branch 
Phone: +61 2 6271 6696 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4215 
Email: 
jonathon.barrington@dpie.gov.au 
 
Ms Cathy WALLACE 
Senior Policy Officer 
International Relations Section 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Branch  
Phone: +61 2 6272 3063 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4215 
Email: 
cathy.wallace@dpie.gov.au 
 
Bureau of Resource Sciences 
Department of Primary Industries and 
Energy 
PO Box E11 
Kingston ACT 2604 
 
Dr Derek STAPLES 
Director 
Fisheries Resources Branch 
Phone: +61 2 6272 5177 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4014 
Email: 
djs@mailpc.brs.gov.au 
 
Peter WARD 
Fisheries Biologist 
Fisheries Resources Branch 
Phone: +61 2 6272 5534 
Fax:  
+61 2 6272 4014 
Email: 
peter.ward@brs.gov.au 
 
CSIRO 
CSIRO Division of Marine Research 
PO Box 1538 
Hobart TAS 7001 
 
Dr Tom POLACHECK 
Senior Research Scientist 
Tropical and Pelagic Ecosystems 
Program 
Phone: +61 3 6232 5312 
Fax:  
+61 3 6232 5199 
Email: 
tom.polacheck@marine.csiro.au 
 
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
RG Casey Building 
Barton ACT 0221 
 
Mr Andrew SERDY 
Sea Law & Ocean Policy Group 
The Legal Office 
Phone: +61 2 6261 3228 
Fax:  
+61 2 6261 2144 
Email: 
andrew.serdy@dfat.gov.au 
 
Ms Janet TOMI 
Director 
Japan Section 
Phone: +61 2 6261 3364 
Fax:  
+61 2 6261 1571 
 
Mr Derek BROWN 
Deputy Director 
Japan Section 
Phone: +61 2 6261 3783 
Fax:  
+61 2 6261 1571 
 
Environment Australia 
Biodiversity Group 
GPO Box 636 
Canberra ACT 2601 
 
Portfolio Marine Group 
GPO Box 787 
Canberra ACT 2601 
 
 
 
 
Mr Steve BOLTON 
Senior Policy Officer 
Clean Seas Section 
Portfolio Marine Group 
Phone: +61 2 6274 1528 
Fax:  
+61 2 6274 1006 
Email: 
steve.bolton@dest.gov.au 
 
Mr Neil HUGHES 
Assistant Director 
Marine Strategy Section 
Portfolio Marine Group 
Phone: +61 2 6274 1088 
Fax:  
+61 2 7274 1006 
Email: 
nhughes@dest.gov.au 
 
Prime Minister & Cabinet 
325 National Circuit 
Barton ACT 2600 
 
Belinda ROBINSON 
Senior Adviser 
Primary Industries & Environment 
Branch 
Phone: +61 2 6271 5039 
Fax:  
+61 2 6271 5177 
Email: 
belinda.robinson 
@dpmc.govau.infonet.com 
 
Neil RICHES 
Adviser 
Primary Industries & Environment 
Branch 
Phone: +61 2 6271 5605 
Fax:  
+61 2 6271 5177 
Email: 
neil.riches 
@dpmc.govau.infonet.com 
 
Marco SALVIO 
Adviser 
Asia, APEC & Trade Branch 
Phone: +61 2 6271 5630 
Fax:  
+61 2 6271 5558 
 
 
 
 
 
Richard FAIRBROTHER 
Adviser 
Asia, APEC and Trade Branch 
Phone: +61 2 6271 5463 
Fax:  
+61 2 6271 5558 
 
Non-government Experts and Advisers 
 
Tuna Boat Owners Association of 
Australia 
PO Box 416 
Fullarton SA 5063 
Phone: +61 8 8373 2507 
Fax:  
+61 8 8373 2508 
Email: 
tuna-b-j@camtech.net.au 
 
Mr Brian JEFFRIESS 
President 
 
TRAFFIC Oceania 
GPO Box 528 
Sydney NSW 2001 
 
Mr Glenn SANT 
Senior Research Officer 
Phone: +61 2 9299 6582 
Fax:  
+61 2 9299 6557 
Email: 
traffico@msn.com 
 
Japan 
 
Delegation 
 
Mr Shuji ISHIDA 
(Head of Delegation) 
Councillor 
Fisheries Policy Planning Department 
Fisheries Agency 
1-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100 
Phone: +81 3 3504 8111 
Fax:  
+81 3 3504 2649 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr Masayuki KOMATSU 
Director for International Negotiations 
International Affairs Division 
Fisheries Policy Planning Department 
Fisheries Agency 
1-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100 
Phone: +81 3 3591 1086 
Fax:  
+81 3 3504 2649 
 
Mr Joji MORISHITA 
Deputy Director  
International Affairs Division 
Fisheries Policy Planning Department 
Fisheries Agency 
1-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100 
Phone: +81 3 3591 1086 
Fax:  
+81 3 3504 2649 
Email: 
KYN06115@niftyserve.or.jp 
 
Mr Morio KANEKO 
Far Seas Fisheries Division 
Resources Management Department 
Fisheries Agency 
1-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100 
Phone: +81 3 3502 2443 
Fax:  
+81 3 3591 5824 
Email: 
morio_kaneko.nm.maff.go.jp 
 
Dr Sachiko TSUJI 
Section Chief 
Temperate Tuna Research Group 
National Research Institute of Far Seas 
Fisheries 
5-7-1 Orido, Shimizu 
Shizuoka 424-8633 
Phone: +81 543 36 6042 
Fax:  
+81 543 35 9642 
Email: 
tsuji@enyo.affrc.go.jp 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ms Naoko HAMAGUCHI 
Fishery Division 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
2-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 100 
Phone: +81 3 3581 1783 
Fax:  
+81 3 3503 3136 
Email: 
naoko.uchida@mofa.go.jp 
 
Mr Kenro IINO 
Counsellor 
Embassy of Japan 
112 Empire Circuit 
Yarralumla ACT 2600 
Australia 
Phone: +61 2 6273 3244 
Fax:  
+61 2 6273 1848 
 
Mr Michio IIDA 
Counsellor 
Embassy of Japan 
112 Empire Circuit 
Yarralumla ACT 2600 
Australia 
Phone: +61 2 6273 3244 
Fax:  
+61 2 6273 1848 
 
Advisers to the Delegation 
 
Federation of Japan Tuna Fisheries 
Cooperative Associations 
3-22 Kudankita 2-chome, Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 102 
Phone: +81 3 3264 6167 
Fax:  
+81 3 3234 7455 
 
Mr Tsutomu WATANABE 
Managing Director 
 
Mr Yuji KAWAI 
Manager, International Department 
 
National Ocean Tuna Fishery Association 
1-1-12 Uchikanda Chiyoda-ku 
Tokyo 101 
Phone: +81 3 3294 9611 
Fax:  
+81 3 3294 9615 
 
Mr Hiroaki YAMAMOTO 
Advisor 
 
New Zealand 
 
Mr Mark EDWARDS 
(Head of Delegation) 
Policy Manager 
Ministry of Fisheries 
PO Box 1020 
Wellington 
Phone: +64 4 470 2619 
Fax:  
+64 4 470 2669 
Email: 
edwardsm@fish.govt.nz 
 
Ms Lee ROBINSON 
Policy Analyst 
Ministry of Fisheries 
PO Box 1020 
Wellington 
Phone: +64 4 470 2667 
Fax:  
+64 4 470 2669 
Email: 
robinsol@fish.govt.nz 
 
Dr Talbot MURRAY 
Pelagic Project Leader 
National Institute of Water & Atmospheric 
Research Ltd 
PO Box 14-901 
Kilbirnie, Wellington 
Phone: +64 4 386 0300 
Fax:  
+64 4 386 0574 
Email: 
t.murray@niwa.cri.nz 
 
Ms Elana GEDDIS 
Policy Officer 
Legal Division 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
Private Bag 18 901 
Wellington 
Phone: +64 4 494 8340 
Fax:  
+64 4 473 2103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Republic of Indonesia Observers 
 
Embassy of the Republic of Indonesia 
8 Darwin Avenue 
Canberra ACT 2600 
Australia 
Phone: +61 2 6250 8600 
Fax:  
+61 2 6273 3545 
 
Mr Indratno SISWOYO 
Minister Counsellor 
Economic Section 
 
Mr Deny KURNIA 
Second Secretary 
Economic Section 
 
Republic of Korea Observers 
 
Embassy of the Republic of Korea 
113 Empire Circuit 
Yarralumla ACT 2600 
Australia 
Phone: +61 2 6273 3044 
Fax:  
+61 2 6273 4839 
 
Mr Ji-Bong SONG 
First Secretary 
 
Taiwan Observers 
 
Taipei Economic and Cultural Office 
Unit 8, Tourism House 
40 Blackall Street 
Barton ACT 2600 
Australia 
Phone: +61 2 6273 3344 
Fax:  
+61 2 6273 3228 
Email: 
ecotecocanberra@netinfo.com.au 
 
Ms Fang-Jou LIN 
Assistant 
Economic Division 
 
 
 
 
 
CCSBT Secretariat 
 
PO Box 37 
Deakin West ACT 2600 
Australia 
Phone:  +61 2 6282 8396 
Fax:  
+61 2 6282 8407 
 
Mr Campbell McGREGOR 
Executive Secretary 
Email: cmcgregor@ccsbt.org.au 
 
Mr Akihiro MAE 
Deputy Executive Secretary 
Email: amae@ccsbt.org.au 
 
Ms Kozue LOGHEM 
Administrative Officer 
Email: kloghem@ccsbt.org.au 
 
Interpreters 
 
Ms Saemi BABA 
 
Ms Kumi KOIKE 
 
Attachment C 
 
Opening Statement of Australia 
 
 
Australia welcomes the delegates from Japan and New Zealand, and observers from the 
Republic of Korea, Chinese Taipei and the Republic of Indonesia, and CCAMLR and 
ICCAT to Canberra. 
It is time for the Commission to demonstrate leadership in the conservation and 
management of SBT, and for the individual members to demonstrate their commitment 
to fulfilling the Commission's mandate. 
All members agree that the SBT stock is severely depleted at levels below 10 per cent of 
the 1960 levels. 
While we are all frustrated by the differences between us, any action we take 
individually or together should be aimed at ensuring the SBT stock progresses towards a 
more robust stock status over time, and towards enhancing prospects for consensus on 
key scientific and management issues. 
Australia has a very substantial interest in the SBT fishery and is concerned at the 
current impasses in the Commission. 
We are committed to taking the steps necessary to secure the sustainability of the SBT 
stock, including action to bring non members into the Commission. 
In January 1998 the CCSBT agreed on the timing for the 1998 stock assessment and 
peer review of the Commission's stock assessment process. Australia urges all members 
to lend their full support to these activities. 
Australia strongly urges all members to use this meeting to resolve our differences and 
seek consensus on outstanding matters before the Commission. 
 
Attachment D 
 
New Zealand Opening Statement 
 
 
The New Zealand delegation welcomes the opportunity to once again meet and work 
with delegations from Australia and Japan in an effort to resolve issues outstanding 
from CCSBT4(2). New Zealand is very concerned at the lack of resolution on core 
issues within the Commission. Our concerns relate to the fundamentally different 
approaches by the parties to the management of SBT. Important differences between the 
parties include: no agreement to a TAC for 1997-98; slow progress on efforts to secure 
the accession or cooperation of non-parties; differences in stock projections; and, more 
recently, Japan’s intent to undertaken unilateral experimental fishing and its efforts to 
establish an arrangement in the IOTC to manage SBT. 
 
These differences threaten the function of the Commission and therefore, the existence 
of a responsible and appropriate framework for the management of SBT. The existence 
of such a framework is directly linked to the continuation of a viable SBT fishery. The 
three parties have clear obligations to cooperate within the framework of the 
Convention for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna, and this should include 
on-going cooperation in the scientific process in order to develop a common approach. 
 
New Zealand recognises that restraint of SBT catch by non-parties is a core issue facing 
the Commission. Although some progress was made at CCSBT4(2) with respect to a 
programme of work to secure the accession or cooperation of non-parties, at this 
meeting New Zealand will seek the commitment of all parties to the programme of 
direct approaches to non-parties. For its part, New Zealand is interested in pursuing 
options, such as trade certification, as use as tools to facilitate non-party accession or 
cooperation. 
 
The continuing function of the Commission is essential because of its role in preventing 
any further deterioration of the depleted SBT fishery - an issue of critical concern to the 
industries and Governments of the three parties. For this reason New Zealand remains 
intent on negotiating in good faith within the Commission with a view to resolving the 
difficult issues before us. 
 
Attachment E 
 
AUSTRALIAN COMMENTS ON THE REVISED JAPANESE JOINT PILOT 
PLAN FOR EXPERIMENTAL FISHING PROGRAM FOR SBT (CCSBT/9709/22) 
20 February 1998 
 
 
Background 
 
Australia continues to hold the view that a carefully designed, well-evaluated and 
properly implemented experimental fishing program (EFP) can be an important tool for 
reducing uncertainty in the stock assessment and improving future management. 
However, such experiments must provide demonstrable benefits for future management 
while minimising any risks to stock recovery. A core element of any effective EFP is 
that it is collaborative in all stages of design, conduct and analysis. As currently drafted 
the proposal does not provide adequately for such collaboration. 
 
Australia provided written comments (Attachment S of the Report of the Third meeting 
- first session) on the August 19 version of the Joint Pilot Plan for Experimental Fishing 
Program for SBT prepared by the Fisheries Agency of Japan (CCSBT/SC/96/33). The 
original proposal has been revised somewhat from the version tabled in August 1996 
and addressed some of Australia's concerns. However, many of the questions and 
concerns raised by Australia at the September 1996 meeting persist. In particular, the 
following concerns remain: (1) the adequacy of objective and incompletely specificed 
testable hypotheses, (2) the level of risk, (3) the level of uncertainty that will be 
resolved, (4) the specific ways the information will be used in the stock assessment and 
management decision processes, (5) the scientific validity of the design, (6) the 
distribution and levels of sampling coverage, (7) the adequacy of the monitoring and 
verification, (8) alternative approaches and designs, and (9) criteria for evaluating the 
results and determining subsequent management actions. 
 
EFP Logic and Decision Rules 
 
The underlying logic and rationale for the EFP requires a re-assessment. The main 
concern is that the experiment is designed to lead to a pre-determined outcome based on 
a misunderstanding of how cpue interpretations lead to uncertainty in the stock 
assessment process. The logic of the Japanese proposal appears to be: 
 
1.  Fish in Area A (currently fished areas) and Area B (previously fished areas) 
2.  Estimate CPUE in both areas 
3.  If fish are found in Area B then reject the Variable Squares hypothesis  
4.  Recalculate a new higher probability of stock recovery to 1980 levels by 2020 
5.  Return to number 1 if the variable square hypothesis is not rejected and if the 
 
probability of recovery has not increased  
6.  Use the higher probability of recovery as evidence of a more robust and healthy 
 
SBT stock 
 
The main problem with this logic is in step 3. Obviously some fish will be caught in 
Area B. Simply finding fish in Area B does not mean that the Variable Squares 
hypothesis is rejected (given a zero weighting). The proposal does not reflect the 
appropriate way to update weights that should be used in the Scientific Committee.  
Both the Constant Squares hypothesis (same density of fish in the previously fished 
areas as in the currently fished areas) and the Variable Squares hypothesis (zero fish in 
the previously fished areas) are extremes of a continuum of possible intermediate 
situations during any particular year. (It should be noted that the constant and variable 
square hypotheses do not represent the extremes for changes over time.) Weighting 
these extreme values higher or lower indicates the degree to which one believes (on the 
basis of the existing evidence) that the "truth" lies toward one or other of the extremes.  
A corollary of the Japanese logic would be if the density of fish in Area B were lower 
from that of Area A, then the Constant Square hypothesis would be rejected. Again this 
would be a distortion of the weighting procedures and the scientific process. 
 
Australia could endorse a proposal based on sound logic rather than one that appears to 
result envevitably in an increased probability of stock recovery regardless of the real 
stock condition. 
 
Australia still believes that an EFP can give useful information to reduce the 
uncertainties in the stock assessment if it is set up and implemented on a sounder 
scientific basis. The following outlines the type of procedure which needs to be 
developed collaboratively: 
 
1.  Assign weights to the alternative hypotheses used to explain CPUE changes. This 
 
needs to take into account the fact that hypotheses form a continuum with the 
 
variable squares and the constant squares being near the bounds of possible 
 
explanations (however, other hypotheses - eg the habitat hypothesis- are even more 
 
extreme). 
2.  Experimentally fish in predetermined blocks in Area A and B, based on a well 
 
designed and implemented experiment. The sampling design needs to be based on 
 
consideration of statistical precision and the implementation needs to include 
 
adequate monitoring and verification (see Annex). 
3.  Use the results of the EFP to objectively re-assign the weightings based on agreed 
 
procedures. 
4.  Recalculate the probability of stock recovery (including all other known 
 
uncertainties) 
5.  Use this new evidence along with information on current stock status and fishery 
 
indicators to determine appropriate TACs and management measures. (The results 
 
from an EFP will not necessarily indicate that the stock can sustain higher catches). 
 
There also needs to be a practical design criteria to determine if the EFP is having an 
adverse impact requiring quota compensation. Agreed criteria and decision rules of 
what will happen if these criteria are met need to be decided up front before an EFP is 
initiated. These criteria have to consider the new stock status, any adverse trends in 
fishery indicators as well as the new estimates of the probability of stock recovery based 
on agreed scientific logic and process for integrating the results of the EFP into the 
scientific process and weightings. 
 
Annex - Technical Comments 
 
 
The revised EFP proposal needs to better address the basic principles underlying the 
design and implementation of an experimental fishing program in an adaptive 
management context. More details are needed on how the results coming from the 
program would be incorporated into the stock assessment and the future management 
decision-making for the fishery. While Australia recognises that a pilot program would 
of necessity be simple and exploratory in design there is not enough information 
provided for the relative risks and benefits of the Japanese proposal to be assessed. 
 
The basic objective of any experimental fishing program should be to improve the 
chances of achieving management objectives. As agreed to by the Commission, "the 
criteria for judging an EFP should be derived from management objectives e.g. a 50 to 
90% chance of achieving 1980 parental stock levels by 2020 and maintaining parental 
stock above that level having achieved...". A critical part of the process is determining 
and specifying how the results of the experiments will be used in the management 
decisions and consequently how the experiments affect the chances of achieving 
management's objectives. This needs to be addressed within the current EFP proposal. 
 
Objectives 
 
The main stated objective of the Japanese pilot program is to conduct a feasibility study 
for vessel deployment (i.e. "whether participating vessels cover appropriately the survey 
area and the appropriate data are obtained"). This is an objective that does not require 
2,010t of catch to determine. In fact this objective requires no quota at all. It can be 
achieved by simply developing a well designed and agreed on sampling scheme with 
appropriate monitoring, including observer coverage. 
 
The objectives of the main EFP program remain unchanged in the revised proposal. As 
such many of the comments Australia provided in September 1996 are still relevant. In 
terms of the SBT stock assessments, interpretation of cpue is only one of a number of 
major sources of uncertainty. In evaluating the merits of the objectives of an EFP, 
consideration needs to be given to the extent to which other options (such as tagging, 
spawning ground surveys, etc) can contribute to the broader management objective for 
the fishery. 
 
Sample Design and Vessel Deployment Scheme 
 
The proposed vessel deployment scheme for Part 1 needs to based on statistically valid 
approaches for developing sampling schemes. There is no statistical justification for 
trying "to reproduce the past operational patterns" in terms of trying to maximise the 
information on the relative abundance in areas that are no longer being fished. In fact 
the proposed deployment scheme results in 75% of the effort/quota being taken from 
time/area strata that are currently being fished. 
 
Setting target cv's of 5% is not an appropriate basis for determining sampling effort. 
Given the underlying variance in daily CPUE rates, the required increase in sample 
effort to achieve marginal increase in precision below even 10% are very large. This is 
demonstrated in the results in table 2 of the proposal which demonstrate that to go from 
cv's on the order of 6 to 5% requires at least an increase in sampling of 67%).  
Moreover, the claim that cv's of 5% will be obtained for Part I of the survey is not 
supported by the results in Table 2. In fact, 5% cv levels are not achievable based on the 
sample sizes provided in Table 2 for either July and August. Thus, for example, even 
with 700 operations in August the cv that is estimated to be achieved would only be 
15% and the effort would likely to have to be more than doubled to achieve a cv in the 
5% range (Calculations for larger sample sizes are not presented). Moreover, the 
bootstrap procedure as implemented will greatly overestimate the level of precision that 
is likely to be obtained because it has not taken into account the nested and non-random 
aspects of the data being used to calculate the estimates. 
 
Sampling error is only one aspect of the total error in any abundance index. The 
potential levels of process error also need to be considered. Substantially 
underestimating total error as the result of estimates with highly precise sampling 
relying on estimates can lead to misleading and unreliable conclusions. 
 
The calculation of sample size needs to be based on an analysis of the statistical power 
to resolve the alternative hypotheses being test in the EFP and not an arbitrarily set level 
of precision. 
 
More information on how vessels will be deployed between the two defined areas in 
Part I are needed to ensure that the desired level of coverage will be achieved (e.g. the 
basis for determining which vessels will fish in which areas and for which time 
periods). 
 
Methods of Analyses and Interpretations 
 
Although the revised plan contains some information of the method of analyses, the 
needs to be clear and full description of how the results of the EFP will be factored into 
the stock assessment for SBT. In particular the scientific methodology by which the 
results will be used for improving the objective weightings of different cpue 
interpretations should be specified. 
 
Appropriate Monitoring 
 
As agreed by all parties, appropriate monitoring and verification is essential if the 
Commission is to have confidence in the results. The proposal does not relate the level 
of observer coverage to the scientific needs of the experiment. Verification of the data is 
a critical issue and without adequate verification the experimental results will be open to 
a wide range of interpretations - possibly even increasing the uncertainty in the stock 
assessments. 
 
There needs to be specific and binding commitments for collaborative verification. A 
high level of observer coverage is required with adequate provisions to ensure that a 
representative and random sample from all vessels is obtained. VMS should be used on 
all vessels for position fixing as this will ensure verification that specified 
spatial/temporal design was achieved. 
 
Assessing the impact of the experimental fishing program 
 
The proposal lacks transparency in terms of the way in which impact will be assessed 
and the criteria for management response to the outcomes of such assessment. These 
should be specified clearly so that the respective risks and benefits of the proposal can 
be assessed. All parties need to have a common understanding of the decision rules to 
be used and the management responses to be implemented at each stage of the program. 
 
Attachment F 
 
New Zealand Comments on Japanese Pilot EFP Proposal 
(CCSBT Doc 9702) 
 
 
Note, these comments summarise material provided by New Zealand to Japan in 1996 
and included in the report from CCSBT3(2) (Attachment T) 
 
DESIGN 
• 
The proposal does no have a clearly worded objective  
• 
No quantitative analysis on the extent to which design will reduce uncertainty 
• 
CPUE uncertainty arises mainly from quarter 2 and 3-large proportion of the fish 
 
come from quarter 4 
• 
Not clear what data will be gathered  
• 
CV estimates are very low (suspect calculated inappropriately; implies precision 
 
not likely to be realised) 
• 
Fishing activities need to be structured to maximise information on unfished areas. 
• 
Very limited additional data collected-recommend the inclusion of otolith 
 
collection and tagging experiment to compliment the EFP design 
• 
Level of data verification proposed (10% coverage) needs to be justified in relation 
 
to precision 
• 
No prescription on how or when the data collected will be shared with Commission 
 
parties 
• 
The programme is supposed to be designed to generate information on abundance 
 
of fish in unfished areas but a large proportion of fishing occurs in currently fished 
 
areas 
 
ANALYSIS 
• 
The proposal does not include an analysis to support the assumption that finding 
 
fish in currently unfished areas means we are able to reject the variable square 
 
hypothesis 
• 
Not clear how the data will be analysed 
 
DECISION MAKING 
• 
Need clear decision rule (e.g. 3 000 tonne increase/3 000 tonne decrease for three 
 
years unless Scientific Committee agrees on assessment that >50% probability that 
 
the stock will rebuild to 1980 levels by 2020). 
• 
No description of how the data generated from the EFP would be analysed to 
 
determine if there had been an adverse effect to the stock. 
 
Prepared by New Zealand 
20 February 1998 
 
Attachment G 
 
FACILITATION OF THE 1998 SCIENTIFIC PROCESS 
 
To clarify the action necessary to facilitate the scientific process in 1998, representatives 
of the Commission's Scientific Committee met on 19 February to confirm the work 
program and general procedures to be followed for 1998. 
 
The following agenda was endorsed to cover the relevant issues: 
 
1. 
Steps required to lead up to the Stock Assessment and Scientific Committee 
 
meetings, 
 
2. 
Review of the Stock Assessment Group (SAG) and Scientific Committee terms of 
 
Reference, 
 
3. 
Resolution of implementation and computational differences in Steps 1 and 2, 
 
4. 
Evaluation and development of VPA output weighting procedures, and  
 
5. 
Setting date for meeting of scientists in April 1998. 
 
Steps required to lead up to the Stock Assessment and Scientific Committee 
meetings 
 
The meeting noted that there were a number of issues to be agreed prior to the start of 
the 1998 stock assessment process which will be the focus of the April meeting of 
scientists. The meeting agreed that the April meeting would also discuss the process and 
rules for considering how and when to incorporate new information, changes to models, 
and biological parameters in the stock assessment process. 
 
It was also agreed that the April meeting would seek to clarify arrangements for 
determining the Chairperson of the SAG. 
 
Review of the Stock Assessment Group (SAG) and Scientific Committee Terms of 
Reference 
 
The meeting noted that the Scientific Committee Terms of Reference were set out in the 
Convention for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna and that the Terms of 
Reference for the SAG had been agreed at the Scientific Process Workshop, Sydney.  
The SAG Terms of Reference and Report format and content are at Annex A to this 
paper; in addition the standard draft agenda for the SAG, agreed at the Sydney meeting, 
is at Annex B. The draft agenda and format and content for the report of the Scientific 
Committee are at Annexes C and D respectively.  
 
The following was confirmed as the timetable for exchange of data and meetings 
 
 
Exchange of catch, effort, size data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
April 28 
 
 
Exchange of catch-at-age and non-members  
 
catch and age composition  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 5 
 
 
Draft agendas for SAG and SC  
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 26 
 
 
Exchange standardised CPUE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
June 9 
 
 
Final dead line for brief description of intended VPA changes June 23 
 
(April meeting may impact on this issue) 
 
 
All documents and list of meeting documents  
 
 
 
July 14 
 
 
SAG meeting  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
July 23-31 
 
 
Scientific Committee meeting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aug 3-6. 
 
The meeting confirmed that all documents for either the SAG or SC would be tabled at 
the start of the SAG. The meeting agreed that the 'Review of Fisheries Papers' should be 
available to the SAG meeting for reference and consideration if there are implications 
for the work of the SAG. Full presentation of those papers would occur at the Scientific 
Committee meeting. 
 
Resolution of implementation and computational differences in Steps 1 and 2 
 
The meeting noted that the resolution of VPA/Projection implementation and 
computation differences would not be completed by the target deadline (1 March) 
suggested at CCSBT4(2). This is due to inadequate resources and competing demands 
of other work. It was further noted that if this matter was not completed within a 
reasonable time it would create difficulties in effectively completing the 1998 
assessment and projections. 
It was agreed that regular e-mail and fax contact would be maintained to resolve 
technical issues relating to the implementation and computational differences in the 
VPA and projections. It was also agreed that a common framework for handling 
constraints and non-convergence in models would be sought. Scientists agreed to make 
their best efforts to complete this work by 1 April 1998. 
 
Evaluation and development of VPA output weighting procedures 
 
It was agreed that comments on the procedures set out in the revision of SC/9707/29 
distributed recently to members of the Scientific Committee would be circulated by  
April 1. Reference to the original should also be made. 
 
Setting date for meeting of scientists in April 1998 
 
Australia proposed that scientists meet 9-10 April, New Zealand advised they were 
available. Japan would confirm their availability or suggest alternate dates by 27 
February. Australia and New Zealand would notify Japan of their other commitments. 
Annex A 
 
Terms of Reference for the Stock Assessment Group 
 
To review any new information on the stock structure and biology of SBT. 
To update the stock assessment of SBT, including estimating trends in abundance and 
current and future stock size 
To develop and evaluate methods and models for assessing the stock status of SBT. 
To provide the technical evaluation of the implications of management measures that 
have been identified by the Scientific Committee. 
To consider any matter referred to it by the Scientific Committee. 
To identify the research and technical requirements for future stock assessment of SBT. 
To produce a report as specified in the agreed "Format and Content for the Report from 
the Stock Assessment Group". 
To refer matters to the Scientific Committee for consideration. 
 
Format and Content for the Report from the Stock Assessment Group 
 
1. 
New data available since the previous stock assessment 
Brief description of new data that has become available since the previous stock 
assessment. A detailed description of these data should be included in subsequent 
sections where appropriate. 
2. 
Biology 
Description of the aspects of SBT biology that are most important for stock assessment, 
including: 
• 
age 
• 
growth 
• 
natural mortality 
• 
reproductive parameters 
• 
stock structure 
3. 
Stock assessment 
Description of the methods, input parameters, and outputs from the stock assessment, 
including: 
a) 
Catch at size/age 
b) 
CPUE analyses 
c) 
Other indices of abundance 
d) 
Population and model parameters 
e) 
Virtual population analysis 
f) 
Other modelling results 
g) 
Model projections 
h) 
Uncertainties 
4. 
Responses to matters referred by the Scientific Committee 
A detailed response to the technical matters referred by the Scientific Committee to the 
Stock Assessment Group. 
5. 
Research and technical requirements for stock assessment 
Description of the research and technical requirements that would improve future stock 
assessments as identified by the Stock Assessment Group. 
 
Annex B 
 
Draft Standard Agenda for the 
Stock Assessment Group 
 
 
1) 
Opening 
 
- 
introduction of participants and administrative matters 
2) 
Appointment of Chair and Rapporteurs 
3) 
Adoption of agenda 
4) 
Biology and stock structure of SBT 
5) 
SBT stock assessment 
6) 
Matters referred by the Scientific Committee 
7) 
Research and technical requirements for future stock assessments 
8) 
Other Business 
9) 
Finalisation and adoption of the Report of the Stock Assessment Group 
10) Close of meeting 
 
Annex C 
 
Draft Standard Agenda for the 
CCSBT Scientific Committee 
 
 
1) 
Opening 
 
- 
introduction of participants and administrative matters 
2) 
Appointment of Chair and Rapporteurs 
3) 
Adoption of agenda 
4) 
Review of SBT fisheries 
5) 
Review of the Report of the Stock Assessment Group 
6) 
Status of the SBT Stock 
7) 
Implications for SBT Management 
8) 
Review of the Report of the Ecologically Related Species Working Group 
9) 
Research requirements 
10) Matters referred by the Commission 
11) Other Business 
12) Finalisation and adoption of the Report of the Scientific Committee 
13) Close of meeting 
 
Annex D 
 
Proposed format and content for the Report of the CCSBT Scientific Committee 
 
 
1. 
Introduction 
 
This section will include a brief overview of the meeting including a list of new 
 
information used in the current assessment as "bullet" points. 
2. 
Review of SBT Fisheries 
 
Description of where, when and how the fishery operated, focusing on the most 
 
recent year and could include: 
 
* 
overview 
 
* 
summaries of party and non-party fisheries 
3. 
Summary of new scientific information 
4. 
Current Management Measures 
 
Description of current management measures 
5. 
Status of the SBT stock 
 
Description of the current status of the stock based on the results of the SAG 
 
Report and information provided to the Scientific Committee, this could include: 
 
* 
current stock size relative to reference points 
6. 
Management Implications 
 
This section includes the implications of the stock assessment results on the 
 
management of the SBT fishery, this could include: 
 
* 
uncertainty 
 
* 
probability of stock rebuild and recovery times 
 
* 
evaluation of the risks of alternative harvest strategies and catch limits 
7. 
Consideration of the ERS Working Group Report 
8. 
Response to matters referred by the Commission 
9. 
Advice and Recommendations 
 
Attachment H 
 
Possible Question for the Managers to Pose to Scientists 
A Proposal by New Zealand 
(20 February 1998) 
 
 
1. 
What is the current status of the PB relative to the PB in 1960 and 1980? 
2. 
What are the trends in PB and recruitment in recent years relative to 1988? 
3. 
What are the major remaining sources of uncertainty in the assessment? How 
 
sensitive are the estimates of stock status and probability of stock rebuild to these 
 
sources of uncertainty? How could those remaining sources of uncertainty with 
 
significant effects on the results of the assessment be resolves? 
4. 
If the PB is increasing, what is the probability that the PB will recover to 1980 
 
levels by 2005, 2010 and 2020? What would be the impact of added removals 
 
comparable to those consistent with increased non-Party fishing effort? 
5. 
What level of catch would be required to ensure that the probability of recovery to 
 
1980 PB levels by 2020 is greater than 50% and 75%? 
6. 
With respect to stock projections provided in previous assessment, how well have 
 
the previous projection results subsequent stock structure and abundance? If 
 
prediction have subsequently been shown to be unreliable, how can predictions be 
 
improved? How could advice to managers be framed to better reflect the 
 
unreliability of stock projections? 
7. 
What program of work should the scientists undertake to develop and estimate 
 
reference points (ie, limit and target reference points as in the UNIA Annex II) for 
 
consideration at CCSBT-5? 
 
