Commission for the Conservation of 
Southern Bluefin Tuna 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the Second Annual Meeting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 – 15 September 1995 
Tokyo, Japan 
 
 
1
Report of the Second Annual Meeting 
12 - 15 September 1995 
Tokyo, Japan 
 
 
The representatives of the Governments of Japan, New Zealand and Australia met for 
the second meeting of the Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna 
during 12 - 15 September 1995 to consider management measures for southern bluefin 
tuna. The overall objective for the management of the southern bluefin tuna fishery is 
the conservation and optimum utilisation of the southern bluefin tuna stock, as specified 
in the Convention for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna. 
 
The meeting was chaired by Mr Kenro Iino (Japan). Dr Alison Turner (Australia) was 
Vice Chair. The Commission approved the conclusions set out below and decided that a 
full summary record of the meeting would be presented for adoption at the Special 
Commission meeting below. 
 
The Commission welcomed the attendance of observers from the Republic of Korea, 
Indonesia, Taiwan, CCAMLR, ICCAT and IPTP at its second meeting, and 
acknowledged the importance of extending the involvement of non-Convention parties 
in the conservation and management process for southern bluefin tuna. 
 
New Zealand and Australia agreed that the total allowable catch (TAC) should be 
maintained with no change to the allocation among members. Japan sought an increase 
in the TAC of 6 000 tonnes. At the conclusion of the second commission meeting no 
consensus could be reached on change to TAC or its allocation. The Commission 
decided to convene a special meeting, commencing 2 October 1995 in Canberra, 
pursuant to article 6(5) to further discuss this issue. 
 
Scientific Report 
 
The Commission considered the results of the scientific committee meeting on 
developments in SBT fisheries, stock status and recommendations from the committee. 
The Commission acknowledged the thorough and diligent work of the committee which 
included scientists from all Commission members, an observer from Indonesia and four 
invited external experts. 
 
Hopeful signs continue to be present in the fishery in the form of continued increases in 
CPUE of juveniles and evidence of sequential rebuilding from 3 year old in 1990 
through to age 6 years in 1993 and possibly 7 years old in 1994. While the sequential 
rebuilding pattern is clear the magnitude is uncertain. CPUE of adults continued to 
decline through 1993 with the partial 1994 data suggesting a slight increase relative to 
1993. The VPAs and projections resulted in divergent views as to the current SBT stock 
status. The Commission noted with regret that it had not been possible for the scientists 
to reach a consensus on the status of the stock. 
 
The Japanese assessment is more optimistic, indicating a very rapid recovery of the 
parental biomass to the 1980 level in 3-4 years. The Australian and New Zealand 
 
2
interpretation of the assessment was more pessimistic suggesting that under current 
catches the probability of the parental biomass recovering to 1980 levels by 2010 
ranged from 17-29% with a low probability of further declines over the same period. 
Given this range of assessment interpretations no agreement could be reached on the 
safety of either retaining current catches or on raising catch limits. 
 
The Commission responded to the request from the Scientific Committee to pose 
questions consideration at their next meeting. A list of questions is provided at Annex 1. 
 
Management Strategy 
 
Since 1993 Japan, Australia and New Zealand have committed to the longer term goal 
for SBT conservation and utilisation of restoring the parental stock to the 1980 level as 
soon as feasible. The short term strategy is to ensure that each year management action 
is directed at achieving an (annual) increase in the parental biomass and reduction in the 
risk of recruitment decline. 
 
Australian and New Zealand sought to develop and implement a more detailed 
decision-making framework incorporating the use of reference points and specific 
time-frames, and noted that in their view, quota increases could only be considered in 
the context of such a strategy. Japan did not share that view. Although accepting the 
value of reference points, Japan expressed doubt in the ability to apply these in the short 
term, and a reluctance to set time-frames to reach goals because of the uncertainties in 
stock evaluation. The Commission noted that consensus on further development of the 
management strategy would be best developed in a specific workshop before the 
Scientific Committee meeting in 1996. The Terms of Reference for this workshop are 
attached as Annex 2. 
 
Specific Measures 
 
The Commission will continue to manage the stock by adjustment of catch levels. 
Change in fishing practices which increase the catch of small fish will continue to be 
discouraged. 
 
Scientific Process 
 
The Commission accepted an Australian offer to draft proposed rules of procedure for 
the Scientific Committee by the end of October 1995. The parties concurred that these 
rules would cover issues raised in a previous draft and would also consider issues 
related to data handling, especially confidentiality, and the role of external scientists.  
The procedures drafted for the participation of external scientists at the 1995 Scientific 
Committee meeting would be those used in the first draft. Commission members agreed 
to provide comments on the draft to Australia before December 24 1995. 
 
The Commission agreed that the quality of the scientific debate and discussion at the 
scientific meeting would be enhanced if parties had an opportunity to examine other 
parties working paper and other key documents prior to the meeting. To this end a 
timetable for information exchange prior to the scientific meeting was agreed and a 
 
3
timetable for 1996 is at Annex 3. 
 
Australia made the point, supported by New Zealand, that it was very important that the 
scientists evaluate their previous projections so that steps could be taken to improve the 
accuracy and quality of information in following years. The Commission agreed that the 
scientific committee would be asked to provide a review of how well stock projections 
in previous years predicted subsequent stock structure and abundance, and provide this 
information in next years scientific report. It was noted by the Japan scientist present 
that this may be very complex, but would be conducted on a trial basis on the condition  
that different performance indicators may be used for different projections. 
 
Collaborative Stock Assessment 
 
The Commission recognised that there was a high level of uncertainty in the stock 
assessment, and that there were areas within the assessment where there was not 
agreement with a consequent range of conclusions. The range of views in the scientific 
report makes the work of the Commission difficult. Australia and New Zealand 
recognised that international obligations required a precautionary approach to 
management under such circumstances. Japan noted that this approach should not be 
applied in an extreme way. The Commission expressed a strong commitment to take 
steps that would decrease the uncertainty in the stock assessment, and to enhance the 
opportunities for reaching mutual understanding and agreement. To achieve this the 
following specific items and actions were: 
 
1. 
Every effort would be made by all Convention parties to ensure more timely 
 
provision of data for the stock assessment. The goal is to ensure that each annual 
 
Scientific Committee meeting has available to it the full catch, effort and size data 
 
for at least the years up to and including the previous year. 
 
2. 
Collaborative research on the analysis of fine scale data would be continued, with 
 
the fine scale data being held by the responsible member. It was recognised that 
 
these data were commercially sensitive, and that these sensitivities must be 
 
respected in the use and reporting of analyses based on fine scale data. The 
 
Commission agreed to develop specific guidelines on handling data, and that 
 
they would be developed within the context of the Rules of Procedure of the 
 
Scientific Committee. 
 
It was recognised that the analysis by the Commission scientists would be more 
 efficient if data at a 1x1 degree and monthly level of aggregation was available to 
 these scientists in their respective countries solely for conducting specific work of 
 the Commission. Because of confidentiality issues Japan indicated they had 
difficulty in exchanging all data in this format at this time. The availability and 
conditions of data provision at this level of aggregation were not resolved during 
the meeting, but the Commission confirmed the existing arrangements to allow 
access to fine data. 
 
3. 
There will be further development and examination of the methods of direct ageing 
 
from otoliths, and development of sampling and archiving arrangements for 
 
4
 
otoliths. Australia and Japan expressed strong interest in the work on ageing 
 
methods, and noted that their scientists would collaborate as much as possible in 
 
this. The Commission decided to request the Scientific Committee to develop 
 
suggested approaches to sampling and archiving the SBT otoliths, and to report 
 
these suggestions to the Commission. 
 
4. 
Fishery independent measures of abundance should be developed. The 
 
collaborative  
Japan-Australia Recruitment Monitoring Program has already 
 
provided the potential to access young fish abundance off southern Australia. 
 
5. 
Australia was asked , and agreed, to provide surface fishery catch, effort and size 
 
data on a 5x5 degree basis to the other Parties to the Convention. 
 
1995/96 CCSBT Workshop Program 
 
The Commission expressed its firm intention to improve mutual understanding and 
agreement on assessment methods so as to reduce uncertainties in the assessments. It 
was recognised that workshops were an effective way of achieving this, but also that 
only a small number of workshops would be achievable because of the limited resources 
available. 
 
Taking into consideration the recommendations of the Scientific Committee, the 
Commission agreed to hold a modelling workshop. 
 
The Commission concurred that: 
 
A scientific workshop be held to further develop and improve mutual understanding and 
agreement on modelling used in the stock assessment. It was recognised by the 
Commission that CPUE modelling and VPA modelling are closely inter-linked issues 
that have a major effect on the results. The Commission decided that the workshop 
should focus on these two issues. No conclusion was reached on whether the workshop 
should take place in Australia or Japan, although a preference was expressed by all 
parties for Australia. It was noted by the Commission that it would be possible to access 
the fine scale data necessary to address the CPUE issues in the Terms of Reference. 
Terms of Reference, a venue and a time for the workshop were identified by the 
Commission (Annex 4). 
 
Real Time Monitoring program (RTMP) 
 
Australia stated that the RTMP was a highly regarded and very successful program that 
highlighted how the scientists, industries and managers of the Commission countries 
could work closely together in international cooperation. 
 
Japan explained that the focus of the RTMP had changed from providing data in real 
time, as this was now happening on all Japanese SBT target tuna vessels. It was 
suggested that rather than having RTMP liaison group meeting, possibly a workshop to 
look at the program would be more appropriate. 
 
 
5
The issue of foreign observers and the percentage of observer coverage was discussed. 
Australia and New Zealand noted the importance of a level of observer coverage that 
would provide representative data and acknowledged the commission should take 
advice from the scientific committee into account in discussing appropriate levels of 
observer coverage at the next meeting. Japan stated that the number of cruises observed 
and the number of days observed have been increased with cooperation from Japanese 
industry and expressed its intention to continue expanding effort within the extent of 
resources available. Japan also stated that it was prepared to accept foreign observers 
provided that logistical problems, such as length of observer cruises, timing of 
placements and accommodation could be addressed. 
 
In addition, Japan stated that the placement of foreign observers should take place on 
vessels inside fishing zones. New Zealand gave "in principle" support to allow Japanese 
observers on board domestic vessels in the New Zealand EEZ on an exchange basis.  
Australia stated that the issue of domestic observers was being discussed through the 
tuna Management Advisory Committee and that these discussions would include the 
allowance of foreign observers on domestic vessels within the AFZ. 
 
The Provision of High Seas Catch Data 
 
The Commission noted the request from the Scientific Committee to maintain and 
enhance data collection mechanisms for the timely provision of verifiable catch, effort 
and size composition data. They confirmed their mutual intention to make efforts to 
improve mechanisms for data collection and exchange on the high seas and within 
exclusive economic zones and set the following targets: 
 
a) 
New Zealand and Australia agreed to provide 100% of position, catch, effort and 
size data for all domestic and joint venture vessels for 1995 to other members by 1 
April 1996. 
 
b) Japan committed to the provision of 100% of the 1994 data and at least 70% of 
position, catch, effort and size data, and would make the utmost efforts to achieve a 
greater level of data provision for 1995, to other members by 1 April 1996. 
 
c) 
Australia and New Zealand undertook to exchange as close to 100% of RTMP data 
(catch, effort and size composition) on a monthly basis. 
 
d) Japan indicated it would attempt to exchange 100% of catch, effort and size 
composition data from the vessels involved in the RTMP program in 1995 on a 
monthly basis 
 
The necessity for careful procedures to maintain confidentiality and prevent 
unauthorised access to fisheries data was recognised as an essential component of these 
mechanisms. Observer coverage will be deployed to provide for verification of the data 
collected and allow statistically reliable interpretation. 
 
 
 
 
6
Conversion Factors 
 
The report from the Scientific Committee noted that conversion factors for southern 
bluefin tuna may vary with the size of the fish, area and season. The Commission 
recognised that inappropriate conversion factors will influence the number of fish which 
may be taken within the quota. To effectively manage the southern bluefin resource the 
Commission should apply controls to accurately constrain removals. 
 
The Commission agreed to review conversion factors for SBT in the 1996 Commission 
meeting. Each party was requested to compile information on conversion factors from 
their respective fishing areas. It was noted that RTMP data provided a source of 
information. The Commission decided that both the data and the respective reports 
should be exchanged between parties at the 1996 Commission meeting. New Zealand 
was of the view that it would be useful if Dr Elizabeth Bradford from NIWA, New 
Zealand coordinated the process inter-sessionally. 
 
Enhancement Programme 
 
A short report was provided on the stock enhancement program conducted in Port 
Lincoln, Australia. Industry from Australia and Japan sought financial support from the 
Commission for continuing work. Japan supported this proposal. Although New 
Zealand and Australia recognised the potential value of this research, enhancement is 
costly and relatively risky in comparison to other research options which could benefit 
the stock. Therefore, they would rank this research as a lower priority. However, the 
Commission endorsed the continuation of the enhancement project with possible 
technical assistance from member countries. 
 
Ecologically Related Species 
 
All parties agreed on the importance of making progress in addressing issues related to 
ecologically related species. While acknowledging the implementation of mitigation 
measures to date, the benefits of collecting and analyzing data with the aim of 
improving performance was recognised. The Commission formally adopted the Terms 
of Reference for the Ecologically Related Species (ERS) Working Group (Annex 5) and 
decided that the first ERS working group meeting would be held in Wellington,18 - 20 
December 1995. These dates would allow time for the working group to submit its 
report, through the Scientific Committee, for consideration by the Commission in 1996. 
 
The Commission recognised that a large number of tasks were being asked of the ERS 
working group, and accepted that the first meeting should have a strategic focus and be 
tasked with developing an operational plan and time-table of tasks. It was noted that the 
working group should have principally a technical/scientific focus and operate under the 
same general principles as those of the Scientific Committee. The Commission 
recognised that the first meeting may benefit from a broad base of skills including 
managers. 
 
 
 
 
7
Non-parties to the Convention 
 
Commission members noted that in recent years there had been significant 
developments with implications for the activities of non-parties to the Convention 
which fished for southern bluefin tuna. In particular, the new United Nations Agreement 
on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks provided that states fishing 
for highly migratory fish stocks in high seas areas covered by a regional fisheries 
management organisation or arrangement should either join that body or agree to apply 
its' conservation and management measures. The Commission members agreed that 
there was an urgent need for all non-parties fishing for southern bluefin tuna to come 
within the Convention regime. 
 
The need to establish appropriate mechanisms for quota allocations for such non-parties 
was recognised as a high priority. With a view to advancing work in this area, the Chair 
circulated a Chair's text which outlines principles for determining quota allocation for 
new entrants (Annex 6). It was decided that in the inter-sessional period, representatives 
of the Commission would approach potential new entrants to explain these principles 
and hold discussions on their potential quota allocation. The Commission members also 
decided to seek from non-parties the fullest possible details of catch data, particularly 
for the 1991-93 period, to assist in the assessment of potential quota allocations. 
 
The presence of observers from the Republic of Korea, Indonesia and Taiwan, and their 
presentations on their SBT fisheries were welcomed by the Commission members.  
The Commission members expressed the hope that the cooperation between the 
Commission and these three observers would continue to develop through their 
effective participation in the Convention regime. All three non-parties indicated their 
interest in participating in the Convention conservation and management arrangements. 
Commission members stressed that given the depleted state of the fishery and the 
restraint that Commission members had been required to demonstrate as a result, it was 
of crucial importance to the future of the fishery that the non-parties did not expand 
their fishing effort or take any other action that could undermine the objectives of the 
Commission. 
 
Commission Secretariat 
 
The first meeting of the CCSBT had approved the administrative arrangements of the 
Commission including the terms of a Headquarters agreement between the Commission 
and the Government of Australia. 
 
The draft 1996 budget and 1997 forecasted Commission budget were discussed. Given 
the decisions on timing of establishment of the Secretariat adjustments were made to the 
total salary component of the budget. A final approved 1996 and 1997 forecasted 
Commission budget is attached at Annex 7. 
 
The Commission agreed to authorize New Zealand to sign the HQ agreement on behalf 
of the Commission. 
 
 
 
8
Vessel Monitoring Systems (VMS) 
 
VMS was recognised by the meeting as being the most accurate and quick way of 
obtaining data from vessels at sea. Japan stated that trials were underway in the AFZ 
with Inmarsat A and C units. The trials suggested both systems were workable. 
 
New Zealand stated that all foreign vessels fishing in their EEZ were required to use 
VMS and that all domestic vessels over 28 metres were also required to use VMS. It 
was also noted that as of 1 November 1995, all foreign vessels fishing in the AFZ would 
be required to report position and catch data via VMS. Japan stated that they would 
work towards the utilisation of VMS on Japanese tuna longliners. 
 
It was suggested that non-convention countries should also be encouraged to install 
VMS on their tuna longline vessels on the high seas as well. 
 
The meeting concurred that the responsibility for collecting VMS data rested with the 
Flag State. However, Australia stated that they would continue to require the reporting 
by foreign vessels to be made to the Australian Fisheries Management Authority for all 
AFZ operations. Australia and New Zealand suggested that VMS data needed to be 
standardised to ensure compatibility and useability between the Commission countries. 
 
Enforcement and Infractions 
 
Australia expressed concern that, despite much useful work by all parties, the draft ToR 
for the Enforcement and Infractions Working Group would need further amendment in 
light of the new responsibilities set out in the UN High Seas Convention. The meeting 
concurred with this view and resolved that the intent of the relevant provisions of the 
UN High seas Convention should be incorporated into a new draft ToR for the 
Enforcement and Infractions Group. Australia undertook to redraft the present ToR out 
of session, incorporating the intent of the UN Convention and undertook to circulating 
the draft to NZ and Japan. 
 
Australia also undertook to include the comments of Japan that the new arrangements 
had to be workable and efficient. 
 
Relations with other bodies 
 
CITES 
 
It was noted that it was a measure of the strength of international concern at the state of 
SBT stocks that in the past few years several governments, including Australia, had 
been asked to propose listing of SBT on Appendix 2 of CITES. 
 
Australia reminded the meeting that although earlier proposals to list SBT on CITES 
were not pursued, it is highly likely the issue will come up again if the Commission is 
not seen to be managing SBT sustainably. Australia urged that we ensure that the 
Commission was in a position to deal with any further listing proposals. 
 
 
9
Japan noted that the new UN High Seas Agreement contains in Article 8(6) an 
obligation on States which were seeking the listing of a species such as SBT on CITES 
to communicate with the affected international fisheries management organisation 
before proceeding with that listing proposal. 
 
ICCAT 
 
The Commission agreed that it should continue to pay attention to the issue of 
competence between CCSBT and ICCAT. It was supported by all parties that the 
CCSBT build upon the relationship between the bodies tentatively developed during the 
9th special meeting of ICCAT at the end of last year. It was agreed that CCSBT should 
continue to attend ICCAT as an observer in order to address the issue of competence 
and maintain communication. 
 
CCAMLR 
 
Mr Hermes, from the Australian delegation, was the official CCAMLR observer. He 
provided a report on CCAMLR activities including matters concerning ERS. Of 
significance is the 1994 resolution of CCAMLR concerning bycatch. CCAMLR has 
invited the CCSBT to provide an observer to the 1995 meeting and all delegates 
supported the proposal that Australia provide an observer. 
 
IOTC 
 
Mr Ardill, the official observer from IPTP addressed the meeting. He informed the 
Commission that the IOTC Convention was likely to become effective in the near future. 
Subsequently, it will take a period for the establishment of the IOTC, and in the interim 
he sought support for IPTP to continue to function. When IOTC becomes operative the 
issue of competence over SBT should be addresses. 
 
FAO Coordinating Working Party on Statistics 
 
Japan reported on its attendance at this meeting. The parties agreed the question of 
possible membership and sending observers, be evaluated following the establishment 
of the Secretariat. 
 
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to 
the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly 
Migratory Fish Stocks  
 
The Commission welcomed the adoption by consensus on 4 August 1995, after three 
years of negotiations, of the Agreement for the Implementation Of the Provisions of the 
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 Relating to the 
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish 
Stocks (the Agreement). 
 
It was noted that the new Agreement established a strong, balanced and comprehensive 
regime for conservation and management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory 
 
10
fish stocks which would have significant implications for the work of the Commission.  
The Commission noted the need to ensure that its work was consistent with the 
provisions of the new Agreement. 
 
In view of the importance of the Agreement in regard to the conservation and 
management of tuna stocks including SBT, members agreed that priority should be 
attached to signing and implementing the Agreement at an early opportunity. It was 
noted that the Agreement would open for signature in New York in December 1995. 
 
Arrangements for the Next Meeting 
 
At the closure of the meeting the Commission elected Dr Turner (Australia) to be the 
new chair and Mr Major (New Zealand) to be the vice chair. It was proposed that the 
third Commission meeting be held 15 - 19 July 1996. 
 
On 15 September 1995 the Commission adopted this report in accordance with rule 10 
of the Rules of Procedure. 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr K Iino 
Chair 
Second Commission Meeting 
 
Annex 1  
Questions for the 1996 Scientific meeting 
 
 
(Note: these questions should be read with Article 9(2) of the Convention) 
 
1.  What is the status and trends for parental biomass and recruitment? 
 
2.  If the parental biomass is decreasing, what reductions in removals will reverse this 
 
trend? 
 
3.  If the parental biomass is increasing, how long will it take to rebuild to the 1980 
 
parental biomass levels at current removals? 
 
4. 
What catch scenarios result in 50% and 75% probability of recovery of the 
 
spawning stock biomass to 1980 levels by 2005, 2010, 2015 and 2020? 
 
5.  What are the major sources of uncertainty in the assessment? What steps can be 
 
taken to reduce these? 
 
6.  With respect to stock projections provided in previous scientific reports - how well 
 
have the previous projections predicted subsequent stock structure and abundance? 
 
7.  To what extent is it possible to express the degree of certainty regarding parameter 
 
estimates and data with a view to working towards the most likely projection of 
 
stock status? 
 
Annex 2 
 
Draft Terms of Reference for the Workshop on Management Strategies. 
 
 
The parties decided to use the draft Australian and Japanese management strategies as 
the basis for discussion and development of a management strategy for the CCSBT at a 
workshop with regard to the present mid-term management strategy. 
 
This workshop should further develop and discuss: 
 
- 
approaches to management strategies 
 
- 
objectives and time frames for management; 
 
- 
how the management strategy can take into account uncertainty; 
 
- 
what are possible reference points to trigger catch variation.. 
 
- 
how can the performance of a management strategy be assessed. 
 
The members proposed an early February timing in Australia. 
 
Annex 3 
 
Revised Timetable 
 
 
18 – 20 December 1995 
ERS Working Group, New Zealand 
 
January/February 1996  
Modelling workshop (venue to be determined) 
 
Early February 199&*  
Management Strategy consultations 
 
1 April 1996  
 
 
Data exchange** (catch, effort & size data) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(11 weeks prior to Scientific meeting) 
 
27 May 1996  
 
 
Exchange** of Standardised CPUE series and brief  
 
 
 
 
 
 
description of methods 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3 weeks prior to Scientific meeting) 
 
10 June 1996  
 
  
Exchange list of meeting documents** and key meeting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
documents to include CPUE, VPA and projections plus 
any  
 
 
 
 
 
other documents** which have a major impact on the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assessment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1 week prior to Scientific meeting) 
 
17-26 June 1996  
 
Scientific Meeting, Hobart 
 
15-19 July 1996 
 
 
Commission meeting, Canberra 
 
 
* 
proposed 
** documents are to be exchanged between all parties in such a manner that the 
 
documents are received by the specified date 
 
Annex 4  
Proposed SBT Modelling Workshop 
 
Terms of Reference: 
 
 
Taking into account the recommendations of the 1995 Scientific Committee Report, 
Appendix 2 sections B and C, Appendix 3, and discussion by the Commission, it was 
decided that a scientific workshop should be held with the objective of understanding 
some of the differences in the assessments. The workshop should address both CPUE 
and VPA modelling approaches by reference to the following general questions. 
 
 
1. 
How do CPUE models behave when the completeness of catch and effort data 
 
 
varies? 
 
 
2. 
What are the consequences of the different approaches to using CPUE as an 
 
 
index of abundance in the VPAs? 
 
 
3. 
What is the sensitivity of the VPAs to the various assumptions, including  
 
 
about the plus-group? 
 
 
4. 
What is the effect of the inconsistencies in historical data on the VPAs? 
 
It is suggested that following the Commission meeting that the scientists develop an 
agenda for the workshop to address these general questions. It is anticipated that the 
workshop might be of approximately two weeks duration and could be held in January 
or February 1996 at a venue to be determined. 
 
Annex 5 
 
Working Group on Ecologically Related Species (ERS) 
 
Terms of Reference 
 
 
1. 
The Ecologically Related Species Working Group will report to the Commission 
 
through the Scientific Committee. The Scientific Committee may provide 
 
comments to the Commission on the reports (including advice and 
 
recommendations) of the Ecologically Related Species Working Group. 
 
2. 
To provide information and advice on issues relating to species associated with 
 
southern bluefin tuna (SBT) (ecologically related species), with specific reference 
 
to: 
 
a) 
species (both fish and non-fish) which may be affected by SBT fisheries  
 
 
operations; 
 
b) 
predator and prey species which may affect the condition of the SBT stock. 
 
3. 
(a) With respect to species identified in 2 a) above, to monitor trends and review 
 
 
existing information and relevant research, including but not limited to studies 
 
 
on: 
 
 
(i) the population biology of ecologically related species; 
 
 
(ii) the identification of factors affecting populations of ecologically related 
 
 
 
species; 
 
 
(iii) the assessment of the SBT and other fisheries effects on ecologically  
 
 
 
related species and of the proportion of the SBT and other fisheries effects 
 
 
 
to the overall effects; 
 
 
(iv) modification to gear and operational aspects of the SBT fishery to  
 
 
 
minimise the effects on ecologically related species 
 
(b) With respect to species identified in 2 b) above, to monitor trends and review 
 
 
existing information and relevant research, including but not limited to studies 
 
 
on: 
 
 
(i) the population biology of ecologically related species; 
 
 
(ii) the identification of factors affecting population of ecologically related 
 
 
 
species; 
 
 
(iii) the assessment of the effects of ecologically related species on the  
 
 
 
condition of the SBT stock 
 
4. 
To provide recommendations on data collection programs and research projects 
 
with respect to species and issues identified in 2 above, including 
 
recommendations on research priorities and estimated costs of such research. 
 
5. 
To provide advice on measures to minimiase fishery effects on ecologically related 
 
species, including but not limited to gear and operational modifications. 
 
6. 
To provide advice on other measures which may enhance the conservation and 
 
management of ecologically related species. 
 
7. 
To review these terms of reference and to recommend to the Commission changes 
 
as and when appropriate. 
 
8. 
To co-operate and liaise with relevant experts, scientists (from Convention parties 
 
and elsewhere) and inter-governmental and non-governmental organisations, in 
 
data collection and analysis on ecologically related species subject to the 
 
provisions of the data handling criteria (Annex1). 
 
9. 
To respond to requests for advice on specific matters from the Commission. 
 
Annex 1  
Data Handling Criteria for the Ecologically Related Species (ERS) 
 
 
 
Working Group 
 
 
1. 
Collection of Data and Samples 
 
a) 
The ERS Working Group will provide recommendations on the information 
 
 
required and advice on how to collect the relevant data and samples. 
 
b) 
The collection of data on and samples of ERS should follow agreed data  
 
 
collection protocols consistent with those of the Scientific Committee, and 
 
 
 
those of the relevant national authority. 
 
c) 
The collection of data and samples of ERS should be conducted in a way that 
 
 
dose not interfere with the safe and smooth operation of the vessels. 
 
2. 
Management of the Data and Samples 
 
a) 
The ERS Working Group shall use procedures that ensure strict   
 
 
 
confidentiality in the use and distribution of data. 
 
b) 
Unless otherwise agreed, samples of ERS collected on the high seas will be 
 
 
held by the flag States; that flag States should facilitate access by other  
 
 
interested scientists to the ERS samples. 
 
c) 
Participants in the ERS working group should assist each other's work by  
 
 
sharing data and samples on ERS. 
 
3. 
Analyses of Data and Samples 
 
Analyses of the data and samples on behalf of the Commission may be conducted 
 
by scientists from the Convention Parties and other relevant experts designated by 
 
the ERS Working Group. 
 
4. 
Consideration of the Results of the Analyses 
 
Results of analyses which use data and samples collected under these criteria will 
 
not be published without the consent of the parties who provide the data and 
 
samples. 
Questions to be Asked of Ecologically Related Species (ERS) Working Group 1995 
 
 
Seabird Species: 
 
1. 
What is the nature and extent of the incidental seabird mortality in SBT and other 
relevant fisheries? 
 
2. 
What is the information available on current overall abundance and recent trends in 
abundance for populations of seabirds that are incidentally caught in the SBT 
fishery? 
 
3. 
To what extent does seabird mortality caused by the SBT fisheries and other 
relevant fisheries contributed to the decline of seabird populations? 
 
4. 
What are the most effective and practical ways of minimising impacts of the SBT 
fishery on seabird populations? 
 
5. 
What further data is required to address the issues raised in 1-4 above? 
 
Other Incidentally Taken Species 
 
What is the nature and extent of information on the incidental take of other species 
in SBT fisheries? 
 
Prey Species: 
 
1. 
What species are important prey of SBT? 
 
2. 
What is the relationship between SBT abundance and prey species abundance? 
 
Predator Species: 
 
1. 
What species are important predators of SBT? 
 
2. 
What is the relationship between SBT abundance and predator species abundance? 
 
Annex 6 
 
Quota allocation to new entrants to the Commission for the Conservation 
of Southern Bluefin Tuna 
 
 
The following conditions will be applied when considering the quota allocation to new 
entrants: 
 
1. 
The quota allocation to new entrants including cooperative Parties will be 
 
calculated based on the past catch records of the new entrant prior to the signature 
 
of the Convention for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna by the present 
 
three Parties in 1993. In this regard, figures in 1991 to 1993 should be provided as 
 
soon as possible by the entrants and shall be verified between the new entrants and 
 
the Parties. Thereafter, those figures should be used. 
 
2. 
In considering the quota allocation to new entrants, the past catch reductions of the 
 
present Parties should be duly taken into account. This reduction rate is 59% 
 
(see below for the calculation). 
 
3. 
In view of 1. and 2. above, it is suggested that in principle the quota allocation to a 
 
new entrant should be calculated by multiplying the average catch between 1991 
 
and 1993 by 41% (100 minus 59). The quota may be adjusted, taking into account 
 
the provisions stipulated in Article 8, paragraph 4 of the Convention.: 
 
(a) relevant scientific evidence 
 
(b) the need for orderly and sustainable development of SBT fisheries 
 
(c) the interests of Parties through whose exclusive economic or fishery zones 
 
 
 
SBT migrates 
 
(d) the interests of Parties whose vessels engage in fishing for SBT including     
 
those which have historically engaged in such fishing and those which have  
 
SBT fisheries under development 
 
(e) the contribution of each Party to conservation and enhancement of, and  
 
 
scientific research on, SBT 
(f) any other factors which the Commission deems appropriate 
Such adjustment should be made as a result of negotiation between the Parties and 
the new entrant. 
 
* 
The quota restriction was introduced in 1986 for the first time, when the catch 
amount was 28,841 mt. The catch amount in 1993 was 11,750 mt. Therefore,    
the catch reduction rate between 1986 and 1993 is calculated:  
(1 - 11750/28841)*100=59%  
 
Annex 7  
Approved Commission Budget 1996 
 
 
 
ITEMS SUBITEMS 
1996 
1997 
Proposed 
Forecast 
Income 
 
 
 
 
Member Contribution 
 
 
 
 
 
Japan 
 
 
 
 
 
NZ 
 
 
 
 
 
Australia 
 
 
 
 
Carry over items 
 
 
 
 
 
Arrears of Contributions 
 
 
 
 
 
Interest 
 
 
 
 
 
New Member Contribution 
 
 
 
 
 
Staff Assessment Levy 
 
 
 
 
 
Other 
 
 
 
 
Total Income 
Expenditure 
 
 
Data Handling 
 
 
Meetings and Workshops 
 
 
including interpreters and translation services 
 
 
Publications 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
Admin/Vehicle 
$7 000 
 
 
Allowances 
$64 000 
 
 
Communications 
$7 000 
 
 
Library 
$3 000 
 
 
Office Requisites 
$9 000 
 
 
Rent 
$35 000 
 
 
Salaries 
 
 
   P4 
$90,000 
 
 
   P3 
$35,000 
 
 
   Clerical 
$40,000 
 
 
Total Salaries 
$165 000 
 
 
Travel*Inter. 
$42 000 
 
 
      Dom 
$8 000 
 
 
Other 
$4 000 
 
 
Setup 
 
 
Recruitment 
$8 000 
 
 
Fitout 
$25 000 
 
 
Capital equip 
$40 000 
 
 
Stationary Logo 
$14 000 
 
 
Financial systems 
$5 000 
 
Total Expenditure 
 
$262 029 
$71 012 
$234 959 
 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$ 568 000 
 
$12 000 
$100 000 
 
$20 000 
 
$344 000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
$92 000 
 
 
 
 
 
$568 000 
$235 826
$63 911
$211 463
$0
$10 000
$0
$40 000
$0
$561 200
$13 200
$110 000
$22 000
$378 400
$30 000
$553 600
Notes 
Salary costings based on two prof officers (Ex Sect at UNP4 %&Ass Ex Sect UNP3 + clerical support) 
* 
Assumes International 2 weeks*Japan, 1 week*NZ, 1 week ICCAT, plus 1 week, plus domestic 2 
week CCAMLR, plus other domestic 
Forecast assumes increase in costs of 10% partly offset in revenue raised in interest and staff levy. 
Note that this is subject to dates of Member contribution deposits & dates of employment of staff. 
This is also not allowing for contribution of new states. 
 
Adopted 15 September 1995 
