 
COMMISSION FIFTEENTH 
REGULAR SESSION 
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA 
                                                           10 –  14 December, 2018  
 
WWF Communique of a Civil Society Organisations Round Table  
on Pacific Tuna Fisheries 
WCPFC15-2018-OP14 
10 December 2018 
1610 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by 
          WWF 
 
Disclaimer: This Communiqué is produced with the assistance of the Forum Fisheries Agency OFMP II Project. The contents are the 
sole responsibility of the Civil Society Roundtable participants and can in no way be reflected to be the view of the Forum Fisheries 
Agency. 
COMMUNIQUÉ ISSUED AT THE END OF A ONE-DAY 
CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANISATIONS (CSO) ROUND 
TABLE ON PACIFIC TUNA FISHERIES, WHICH WAS 
HELD ON 21ST NOVEMBER 2018 AT THE WWF-
PACIFIC REGIONAL HEADQUARTERS IN SUVA, FIJI. 
THE CONSULTATION WORKSHOP TO DEVELOP A 
CSO POSITION TO WCPFC15 WAS HELD WITH 
SUPPORT FROM THE FFA OFMP II PROJECT.1 
 
Background  
 
Tuna species are highly migratory and require international collaboration to ensure their 
sustainability. The WCPFC has the mandate to ensure well-managed tuna populations can 
provide economic security and livelihoods for many countries, particularly the Pacific 
Small Island Developing States (PSIDS).  To ensure the sustainable management of this 
economically valuable natural resource provides equitable benefits for Pacific Island 
people, it is essential that civil society representatives have a voice in all parts of the 
decision making process.  
The decisions made by the 15th Regular Session of the WCPFC will not only influence the 
future of tuna and other highly migratory fish stocks and associated species in the WCPO, 
these decisions will directly shape the future of people and communities working in and 
derive their livelihood  from the fishery.  
The outcomes of the WCPFC15 deliberations must continue  progress toward achieving 
the goals of the Pacific Regional Roadmap for Sustainable Pacific Fisheries including  
improving overall sustainability for the four key tuna species, safeguarding food security, 
value, employment opportunities, and safety of those working in the fishery and 
associated industries. A resilient and sustainable tuna fishery also contributes to 
safeguarding and enhancing the resilience of the Pacific Islands region to the impacts of 
climate change.  
                                                 
 
COMMUNIQUÉ 
2018 
NOVEMBER 
                         
2 
 
COMMUNIQUE: WCPFC 15 
Representatives of Pacific-based Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) convened a 
roundtable meeting on 21st November 2018 to discuss upcoming issues at WCPFC15. 
CSOs representatives included the Pacific Islands Association of Non-Government 
Organisation (PIANGO), Pacific Islands Private Sector Organisation (PIPSO), Women in 
Fisheries Network (WiFN), Pacific Dialogue Limited (PDL), Fiji Council of Social Services 
(FCOSS), Suva District Council of Social Services (DCOSS) and World Wide Fund for 
Nature (WWF).  
The safety and basic human rights of fishing crew, marine pollution, transparency and 
accountability of the Commission were highlighted as concerns by the Round Table, 
without losing sight of the importance of the sustainability of the WCPFC’s tuna resource. 
We express our particular concern over South Pacific Albacore. The sustainability and 
economic viability of this fishery is of particular importance for those PSID Coastal State 
members that depend on the domestic fishery for their livelihoods and economic 
opportunities.  
 
ISSUES   
CSO representatives agreed that some of their concerns raised at previous sessions of the 
Commission have not been sufficiently addressed.  As such, the following issues have been 
identified as of primary importance to be considered by WCPFC15: 
1. 
Urgency for collective agreement to establish a target reference point (TRP) for 
South Pacific Albacore tuna at WCPFC15 without any further delay.  
2. 
Limited observer participation and the need for greater transparency in the 
Commission’s decision-making process to ensure sufficient accountability and 
openness in the management of our tuna resource.  
3. 
The need for greater observer coverage in the longline fishery to ensure the 
accuracy and adequacy of data enhances the Commission’s ability to effectively 
manage the tuna fishery sustainably. Limited observer coverage limits the ability to 
monitor compliance with conservation and management measures.  
4. 
Controlling high seas catch, effort, capacity and associated activities in particular, 
at sea transhipments. In addition, the use of FADs and the impacts to coastal 
 
 
Sample Paper 
Sample Paper 
Sample Paper 
 
3 
 
COMMUNIQUE: WCPFC 15 
 
communities and small-scale fisheries and fishers must be taken into 
consideration in deliberations on FAD management. 
5. 
Safe working conditions and well-being of fishing crew and of fisheries observers, 
and the documentation and supporting mechanisms for reporting of incidences 
while they are at sea. 
6. 
Impacts on the wider oceanic environment of marine pollution from fishing 
vessels.  
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Civil Society Organisations that participated at the November 2018 CSO Round Table on 
Pacific Tuna Fisheries  support the sustainable utilization  of tuna resources in the WCPFC 
Convention Area and the equitable distribution of returns to benefit all including PICs 
domestic industrial fishers and local coastal communities thereby safeguarding their food 
and economic security. 
We, the 2018 CSO Round Table on Pacific Tuna Fisheries participants call on the Tuna 
Commission to:  
1. Ensure safe and decent working conditions of fishing crew and fisheries observers 
operating in the Convention Area. We strongly support FFA’s draft Resolution on 
Labour Standards for Crew on Fishing Vessels and urge CCMs to adopt the 
Resolution which builds on progress for addressing observer safety and is a step 
toward ensuring that appropriate labour conditions for both crew and fisheries 
observers are put in place. In addition there is a need to improve requirements and 
avenues for reporting of incidents involving crew safety to ensure accountability, 
transparency and to inform future management of this issue.  Furthermore we urge 
CCMs to take the necessary steps to adopt and implement the ILO Convention No. 
188 or ILO – Work in Fishing Convention, 2007 (No.188) that came into force on 
16th November 2017 including related instruments. 
2. Without any further delay, establish a target reference point (TRP) for South Pacific 
Albacore tuna that will accomplish objectives to ensure the long-term 
sustainability, productivity and social benefits of the fishery. 
                         
4 
 
COMMUNIQUE: WCPFC 15 
3. Improve transparency of the WCPFC proceedings to ensure consistency with 
Article 21 of the Convention. The Commission should consider the following: 
a. Allow WCPFC observers access to all sessions of the WCPFC including 
matters relating to Compliance;  
b. Ensure WCPFC observers are included in the final Terms of Reference for a 
Science-Management dialogue. 
c. Review the decision regarding the participation fees for WCPFC observers. 
Fees should not prohibit participation of CSOs from developing countries.  
4. Increase the number of fisheries observers on board longline fishing vessels 
operating within the Commission’s jurisdiction to ensure improved catch data, 
reporting and compliance with regulations. Furthermore, CCMs must continue to 
facilitate the uptake of electronic monitoring systems, along with standards that are 
consistent and compatible in use and practice particularly on the high seas, to 
complement the work of fisheries observers as a means to ensure full observer 
coverage on all longline fishing vessels is achieved.   
5. We recommend prohibiting at sea transhipments particularly on the high seas 
given the challenges of effectively monitoring transhipments on the high seas and 
recommend that transhipments take place in port. CCMs must also take the 
necessary steps to implement CMM 2017/02 Conservation and Management 
Measure on Minimum Standards for Port State Measures in order to strengthen 
efforts to combat IUU fishing. We encourage CCMs to conduct more port 
inspections particularly on vessels suspected of being involved in IUU fishing 
activities.   
6. CCMs should take the necessary steps to implement CMM 2017/04 Conservation 
and Management Measure on Marine Pollution in particular prohibiting the 
discharging of any plastics and we call for further action to prohibit the deliberate 
abandonment of fishing gear currently not covered under CMM 2017/04. 
7. Continue progressing, without delay, the development and adoption of robust and 
comprehensive harvest strategies including key elements, for all major tuna stocks.  
 
 
Sample Paper 
Sample Paper 
Sample Paper 
 
5 
 
COMMUNIQUE: WCPFC 15 
 
Conclusion 
  
We, the CSO representatives at the CSO Round Table on Pacific Tuna that met in 
November 2018 wish to thank the Commission for the opportunity to table our joint 
concerns.  
We continue to emphasise that the concern about the sustainability of the tuna resource is 
a concern that is shared by the CSO Round Table. We also care as it not only translates to 
economic security of our nations, private and public sectors, communities, and families, 
but also to social, cultural, health, biological and environmental securities that need to be 
addressed in this and future deliberations of the Commission. We remain hopeful that the 
outcomes from WCPFC15 will reflect this.  
 
The following organisations hereby endorse this communiqué:  
 
 
     
  
 
 
                        
                              
   
                                                                   
 
                                         
 
    COMMUNIQUE              
 
W
                         
6 
 
COMMUNIQUE: WCPFC 15 
Abbreviations 
 CCMs  
- 
Cooperating Commission Members 
CSO 
 
- 
Civil Society Organisation 
DCOSS  
- 
District Council of Social Services 
EEZ 
 
- 
Exclusive Economic Zone 
FAD 
 
- 
Fish Aggregation Device 
FCOSS  
- 
Fiji Council of Social Services 
FFA 
 
- 
Forum Fisheries Agency 
ILO 
 
- 
International Labour Organisation 
IUU 
 
-  
Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing  
OFMP II 
- 
Oceanic Fisheries Management Project II 
PDL 
 
- 
Pacific Dialogue Limited 
PIANGO 
- 
Pacific Islands Association of Non-Government Organisation 
PIPSO  
-  
Pacific Islands Private Sector Organisation 
PSIDS  
- 
Pacific Small Island Developing States 
SPC 
 
- 
Secretariat of the Pacific Community 
TRP 
 
- 
Target Reference Point 
WCPFC 
- 
Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission 
WCPFC15 
- 
15th Regular Session of the Commission 
WCPO  
- 
Western and Central Pacific Ocean 
WIFN  
-  
Women in Fisheries Network 
WWF Pacific - 
World Wide Fund for Nature Pacific 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WWF 
 
COMMUNIQUÉ  
 
 
 
 
NOVEMBER 2018 
