COMMISSION
Tenth Regular Session
2th December – 6th December 2013
Cairns, AUSTRALIA
STATEMENT OF CITES SECRETARIAT
WCPFC10-2013-OP08
0830-05/12//2013
-1-
10th Regular Session of the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC)
(Cairns, Australia, 2-6 December 2013)
Statement by the CITES Secretariat
On behalf of the Secretary-General of CITES, John Scanlon, we would like to sincerely thank
you, Mr Chairman, for giving us the floor, and express our gratitude to the Government of
Australia for hosting this 10th Regular Session of WCPFC in Cairns.
The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of wild fauna and flora (CITES)
is a legally binding international agreement between 179 countries including many
members, cooperating non-members and participating territories to this Commission.
The interaction of CITES with regional fisheries management organizations such as WCPFC
has taken on new significance with the CITES listing of several shark species, that fall under
the purview of the Commission. At the 16th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to
CITES (CoP16) in Bangkok in March 2013 and because they met specific trade and biological
listing criteria, Porbeagle shark (Lamna nasus), Oceanic whitetip shark (Carcharhinus
longimanus), Scalloped hammerhead shark (Sphyrna lewini), Great hammerhead shark (S.
mokarran) and Smooth hammerhead shark (S. zygaena), as well as all manta rays (Manta
spp.), were included in CITES Appendix II - meaning that international trade is strictly
regulated and controlled to avoid utilization incompatible with their survival, but is not
prohibited.
The entry into effect of these listings has been delayed by 18 months until 14 September
2014 to enable CITES Parties to resolve technical and administrative issues related to their
implementation. From 14 September 2014 onward, any international trade in specimens of
these species will need to be accompanied by CITES permits and certificates confirming that
they have been harvested sustainably and legally, and this trade will also need to be
reported to the CITES Secretariat.
The collaboration between CITES authorities and fishery agencies at national and regional
levels will be essential for the effective implementation of these requirements, and this will
need to get assistance where required. National and regional fishery management agencies
and organizations have the main responsibility for managing fishery resources, including
sharks and rays. CITES, as a global instrument for regulating international trade in listed wild
species, can complement fishery management to encourage fishery stakeholders -
managers and fishers alike - to implement and follow sustainable and legal fishing practices
for international commercial trade. Good fishery management measures based on the best
scientific information available play a major role in the implementation of CITES
requirements for international trade in commercially-exploited aquatic species.
To effectively implement the CITES CoP16 decisions for the 5 sharks and the manta rays, the
involvement of, and support for a wide-range of stakeholders will be needed. The response
to this challenge has been remarkable, with a flurry of activities being put in place since
March 2013, for which we are particularly grateful. Just to name a few: Australia and New
Zealand, Brazil, China and Germany, as well as several NGOs, are planning regional capacity
building workshops dealing with specific aspects of the CITES shark listings; identification
-2-
materials are being developed; targeted needs assessments are being made; guidelines to
determine that proposed trade levels are sustainable are being established; and the
European Union and the USA, amongst others, have pledged financial support for assisting
these and other efforts.
The CITES Secretariat is also committed to assist CITES Parties, especially developing
countries, in being able to comply with the CITES requirements by 14 September 2014. The
European Union has generously provided 1.2 million Euro to the CITES Secretariat to
enhance the implementation of the legally binding CITES regulatory measures for sharks.
We are closely cooperating with the FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Department in this
initiative. Our joint actions are aimed at enhancing the efforts of regional fisheries
management organizations, and at developing countries that are key shark fishing nations
which need to strengthen their scientific, institutional or enforcement capacities.
This initiative also involves outreach and communication. The Secretariat has just launched
a dedicated webpage on sharks and CITES, with comprehensive and up to date information
on a broad range of range of issues such as the CITES/FAO collaboration and access to
capacity building tools. The webpage is a work in progress and will be further developed
over time. We invite you to visit it through our Homepage at www.cites.org. and will be
happy to provide further assistance and help if and when required.
Finally, Mr Chairman, the CITES Secretariat would greatly appreciate if this Commission
could consider at one of its future meetings a dedicated discussion on how WCPFC and
CITES could collaborate on issues and species of common interest, including the sharks just
mentioned. We would be very willing to work together with the WCPFC secretariat and the
members of the Convention in this regard.
Thank you for your attention.
_____________________________
