 
COMMISSION  
SIXTEENTH REGULAR SESSION  
Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea 
5 - 11 December 2019 
Recommendations to the 16th Session of WCPFC 
                                                                                                                                 WCPFC16-2019-OP17 
06 December  
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by 
IGFA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Game Fish Association 
 
 
 
   
300 Gulf Stream Way, Dania Beach, Florida, 33004 U.S.A. 
 
 
 
     
 Phone:  (954) 927-2628  •  Fax: (954) 924-4299 
 
 
 
  
 
 The International Game Fish Association is a nonprofit organization committed to the conservation of 
game fish and the promotion of responsible, ethical angling practices through science, education, rule 
making, record keeping and recognition of outstanding accomplishments in the field of angling.  
 
Email:  HQ@igfa.org  • Website: www.igfa.org  
 
Recommendations to the 16th Regular Session of the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries 
Commission 
 
The International Game Fish Association (IGFA) is a non-profit organization that represents recreational 
anglers throughout the world. IGFA was established in 1939, has active members in over 100 countries and 
provides rules for ethical angling practices. Many of the IGFA’s members target the highly migratory 
species managed by WCPFC, especially marlin, sailfish and spearfish (i.e., billfish) which are primarily 
caught and released.  
 
IGFA has great concern about how highly migratory species are being managed on a global level for 
recreational anglers. The lack of data and accurate reporting on billfish catch is of particular concern. As an 
organization that is committed to the conservation of game fishes, IGFA has deployed over 400 pop-up 
satellite archival tags in marlin around the world in the past eight years, many of which have been in the 
area under this organization’s purview. The information gained from this exercise is available to your 
scientific committee.   
 
Billfish 
 
North Pacific Striped Marlin 
The IGFA’s primary concern for the 16th Regular Session of the Commission continues to be the status of 
striped marlin.  According to the last stock assessment (2019), the WCNPO stock has experienced a long-
term decline in population biomass and the stock is currently overfished and experiencing overfishing.  The 
2017 spawning stock biomass is estimated at just 981 t and the biomass of age 1 and older fish is 6,000 t.  
Taken collectively, the current spawning stock biomass is 76% below that necessary to achieve MSY and 
fishing mortality is 7% higher than that would achieve MSY.  As such, the stock continues to be both 
overfished and experiencing overfishing and no reference points have been established by the WCPFC.  
Additionally, there is concern regarding the low short-term recruitment that the stock experienced between 
2012-2016. 
 
Because of the severely depleted nature of the stock and uncertainty regarding if it will continue 
experiencing low recruitment, the IGFA recommends that the WCPFC reduce total catch to no more 
than 1,359 t in order to achieve a 60% probability of attaining a spawning stock biomass of 3,610 t by 
2022.   
 
Southwest Pacific Striped Marlin 
The most current information for southwest Pacific striped marlin indicates that the stock is overfished and 
very close to experiencing overfishing.  This stock’s spawning biomass has been depleted to less than 20% 
of its unfished condition, even though recent catches are roughly half of the MSY for the stock.  
 
The IGFA recommends that the WCPFC heed the recommendations of SC15 and enact measures 
reduce the overall catch of the stock, including the expansion of the geographical scope of CMM-
2006-04 to cover the distribution range of the stock.  
 
General Recommendations 
Although primarily a commercial bycatch species, billfish are highly sought-after recreational species that 
are primarily caught and released.  Recreational fisheries for billfish also yield significant economic 
benefits at the regional level. As such, the IGFA recommends that all countries be required to report dead 
discards and use circle hooks in their longline fisheries to reduce fishing mortality and improve the survival 
of released fish. 
 
