 
 
COMMISSION 
THIRTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Denarau Island, Fiji 
5 – 9 December, 2016 
LETTER FROM SEVERAL FOODSERVICE COMPANIES 
WCPFC13-2016-OP11 
1 December 2016 
 
 
Paper submitted by Monterey Bay Aquarium 
 
1 
 
  
           
 
 
 
 
 
November 30, 2016 
 
To: Members, Cooperating Non-Members and Participating Territories of the Western and 
Central Pacific Fisheries Commission 
 
Dear Delegates, 
 
Our companies represent major U.S. seafood buyers that source seafood products from a diverse, 
international supply network, including from the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, a region for 
which your government serves as an important leader as a member of the Western and Central 
Pacific Fisheries Commission (Commission). Our companies purchase a variety of tuna products 
from member countries, and we recognize that the sustainability of tuna stocks is integral to our 
businesses as well as the health of the marine environment.  
 
We recognize that the Commission has made some initial progress in recent years to establish 
basic science-based management measures to ensure the sustainability of the world’s largest tuna 
fishery in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean. Specifically, in 2015 the Commission 
committed itself to develop and implement a six-part harvest strategy approach for each of the 
key fisheries or stocks under its management, including a work plan with clear timelines. We 
support this initial action, and encourage the Commission to apply the Precautionary Approach 
using clear target and limit reference points and harvest control rules, as called for by the United 
Nations Fish Stocks Agreement.  
 
As you prepare for the upcoming 13th Regular Session of the Commission, we urge your 
government to support the full implementation of the work plan for harvest strategies, including 
timelines to adopt appropriate biologically-based target reference points, harvest control rules and 
the other elements of the harvest strategy approach, for skipjack, bigeye, yellowfin and south 
Pacific albacore tuna. In particular, we urge you to ensure that the Commission takes decisions 
necessary this year (e.g., agree on acceptable levels of risk, a rebuilding timeframe for bigeye 
tuna, and management objectives for south Pacific albacore, skipjack, bigeye and yellowfin) to 
allow management strategy evaluation and other work to proceed as scheduled in 2017.  In 
addition, we request your support for proposals that would establish precautionary target 
reference points for skipjack and south Pacific albacore. In order to optimize harvest control rules 
for all tuna stocks in the future, we suggest that the Commission request regular updates from 
your scientific advisors regarding reference points and performance indicators, and consider a 
monitoring scheme. 
 
2 
 
Finally, we are very concerned with the severely depleted population of Pacific bluefin tuna, 
including the lack of action to recover the population to sustainable levels and no progress in the 
development of harvest strategies. Given the dire condition of the stock, we urge all delegates to 
ensure that steps are taken in 2017 to establish a precautionary management framework and a 
rebuilding plan that will recover the population to levels that can achieve maximum sustainable 
yield in accordance with CMM 2014-06 and the Convention, respectively.   
 
Thank you for your consideration of these requests. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Tod MacKenzie 
Senior Vice President, Corporate Communications and Public Affairs 
Aramark 
 
Maisie Ganzler 
Chief Strategy & Brand Officer 
Bon Appetit Management Company 
 
 
Amy Keister 
Vice President of Consumer Engagement 
Compass Group USA 
 
 
Cc:  
Ms. Rhea M. Moss-Christian, Chair 
Mr. Feleti P. Teo OBE, Executive Director 
 
