1 
 
 
 
COMMISSION 
SIXTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea 
5 – 11 December 2019 
PITIA Position Statement WCPFC16 
 WCPFC16-2019-OP19 
9 Dec 2019 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by 
PITIA 
         Pacific Islands Tuna Industry Association  
 
 
c/o Fiji Fishing Industry Association, P.O BOX 178, Suva, Fiji Islands 
PH: +679 9292899 (Fiji) Email: jmaefit@pacifictuna.org   
 
 
website: www.pacifictuna.org  
 
 
PITIA Position Statement WCPFC 16 
 
Dear Chairlady, 
Pacific Islands Tuna Industry Association would like the thank the Western and Central 
Pacific Tuna Commission (WCPFC) to extend its invitation for PITIA to participate in the 
16th Annual meeting of the WCPFC in Port Moresby Papua New Guinea. 
Pacific Islands Tuna Industry Association (PITIA) would like to congratulate the incoming 
chairlady on her appointment as the Chair of the Western and Central Pacific Tuna 
Commission (WCPFC) and PITIA is looking forward to work with you and the commission 
in progressing the work of the commission. 
PITIA would like to acknowledge the WCPFC15 for making big decisions during the 
WCPFC15 annul meeting, including adopting a target reference point for South Pacific 
Albacore, Resolution 2018:01 on Labour standards for crew on fishing vessels and not to 
increase the allocations for big eye tuna in the review of the CMM 2017-01. The 
commission in making strong decisions like these have shown that the commission is 
responsible in its role to manage this fishery under its charge. This will gain the confidence 
of all the stakeholders that involve in the fishery that the commission is doing its mandate 
to manage the WCPO’s highly migratory tuna resources.  
 
ISSUES AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
1. HARVEST STRATEGIES 
Whilst PITIA acknowledge the WCPFC15 for agreeing to an interim Target 
Reference Point (iTRP) for the South Pacific Albacore during the WCPFC15. PITIA is 
concerned with the slow progress in the work on harvest strategies since the 
timeframe for adoption of harvest strategies in the workplan for harvest Strategies 
in the CMM 2014-06 have lapsed. The commission has to step up in progressing the 
work in agreeing to a harvest strategy for the 4 key tuna species as agreed to in the 
workplan.    
Where a wholistic management measure and governance at the WCPFC level is 
critical for management and sustainability of the region’s tuna resources.  
         Pacific Islands Tuna Industry Association  
 
 
c/o Fiji Fishing Industry Association, P.O BOX 178, Suva, Fiji Islands 
PH: +679 9292899 (Fiji) Email: jmaefit@pacifictuna.org   
 
 
website: www.pacifictuna.org  
 
 
2. Electronic Monitoring and Electronic Reporting. 
PITIA acknowledges the work done by the EM and ER working group and supports 
the time line given to have an EM and ER CMM by 2020. PITIA would like to 
encourage the WCPFC to learn from the experiences in the success and challenges 
from the trial that is done in the Pacific region. These trials have shown success in 
the EM and the program is ready to be rolled out. PITIA would like to see this 
program roll out across all the fleets in the WCPO and not only targeting the low 
risk domestic fleet which is the case for the EM trials. PITIA would also encourages 
the WCPFC to use the experiences of the regional and other subregional RFMOs 
EM and ER tools which have being trial and successfully used for the last couple of 
years which is successful as well. 
3. Labour Standards for Crew on Fishing Vessels 
PITIA acknowledges the WCPFC15 for adoption of the Resolution 2018-01 on 
Labour Standards for crew on Fishing Vessels. The resolution should be seen as a 
work in progress and gaps within the resolution should be improved to align the 
working condition to international labour regulations like the IMO’s Cape Town 
Agreement, ILO’s c188 and social accountability Standards like the Social 
Accountability International’s SA8000 standard and then progress the work on to a 
social standards CMM. 
4. Observer Engagement in WCPFC Processes. 
PITIA acknowledges the improved observer engagement at the WCPFC meetings 
which is important for transparency in the decision-making processes and 
accountability in the management of the Western and Central Pacific tuna 
resources. PITIA acknowledges the concerns raised in the WCPFC 16 working paper 
14 on the draft guidelines for observer participation in the closed meeting for the 
commission and its subsidiary bodies which considers the compliance monitoring 
report. PITIA would like to support the NGOs statement on this issue and 
encourage the commission to encourage the participation of observers in 
accordance with international fisheries law and international law more generally, 
non-State actors should be afforded the opportunity to participate in RFMO 
meetings. In doing so, RFMOs, such as the WPCFC, give effect to: 
         Pacific Islands Tuna Industry Association  
 
 
c/o Fiji Fishing Industry Association, P.O BOX 178, Suva, Fiji Islands 
PH: +679 9292899 (Fiji) Email: jmaefit@pacifictuna.org   
 
 
website: www.pacifictuna.org  
 
 
• Article 12 of the United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement ‘States shall provide for 
transparency in the decision-making process and other activities of subregional 
and regional fisheries management organisations and arrangements’, and ‘…shall 
be afforded the opportunity to take part in meetings … as observers’ 
• Article 7.1.9 of the FAO Code of Practice for Responsible Fishing ’States and 
subregional or regional fisheries management organisations and arrangements 
should ensure transparency in the mechanisms for fisheries management and in 
the related decision-making process’, and  
• Article 21 of the WCPFC Convention and Rule 36 of the WCPFC Rules of Procedure.  
• Principle 10 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development provides that 
‘Environmental issues are best handled with the participation of all concerned 
citizens’ and ‘States shall facilitate and encourage public awareness and 
participation by making information widely available’.  
 
PITIA is looking forward to participate in the WCPFC16 meetings and would like to wish all 
the CCMs, NCCMs and observer a fruitful and successful discussion during the WCPFC16. 
ABOUT PITIA 
The Pacific Islands Tuna Industry Association (PITIA) is the regional body that represents 
the national fisheries industry in Pacific Island Countries. 
PITIA have permanent observer status with the Regional Fisheries Management 
Organisations like Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) and Western and Central Pacific Fisheries 
Commission (WCPFC). 
Objectives of the organisation remain very much tied to the welfare of its members: 
1. To provide a united voice for the Forum Island Countries’ domestic fishing and 
associated industries with particular focus on influencing policy. 
2. To facilitate and encourage the promotion of the economically and biologically 
sustainable use of tuna and tuna-related resources by Forum Island Countries’ domestic 
tuna fishing and associated industries in the region. 
3. To undertake, co-ordinate and promote liaison and negotiations with national, regional 
and international bodies and other entities having an interest in or an effect on the fishing 
or associated industries of the Forum Island Countries. 
 
