 
 
 
COMMISSION 
Tenth Regular Session 
2th December – 6th December 2013 
Cairns, AUSTRALIA 
GREENPEACE BRIEFING TO THE 10TH REGULAR MEETING OF WCPFC 
WCPFC10-2013-OP02 
19 November 2013 
 
Greenpeace Briefing to the 10th Regular Meeting of WCPFC
Greenpeace Briefing to the 10th Regular Meeting of WCPFC
Cairns, Australia, 2 to 6 December 2013
1. Introduction
Delegates to the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) have in recent years 
witnessed very frustrating negotiations: Parties have agreed measures based on lowest common 
denominators which were satisfactory to no one; they have showed a lack of will to make difficult 
choices; and worst of all, they have compromised the future of Pacific tuna fisheries. The result has 
been ineffective conservation measures that were destined to fail. Greenpeace therefore attends this 
10th Annual Meeting of the WCPFC in the hope that the dynamics of previous meetings will be 
significantly changed.
The Western and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPO) is in urgent need of fishing capacity reduction and 
effective controls on fishing effort. Both aspects – capacity and effort limitations – need to work 
together and parties should recognise they are not mutually exclusive. Precautionary target and limit 
reference points, required under the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) Code of Conduct and 
the United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement, must be adopted. Some stocks of great importance 
continue to be managed unsustainably, namely bigeye tuna, yellowfin and Pacific bluefin tuna, with 
southern albacore fisheries becoming uneconomical as stocks decline. Many shark populations are 
seriously depleted, or stock levels are extremely uncertain, and they need to be put on the road to 
recovery.
In summary, Greenpeace urges parties to the WCPFC to collaborate in order to set the foundations 
for a sustainable future for WCPO tuna fisheries, namely by:
•
agreeing an immediate cap on new built longline and purse vessels in the region by 
developed parties and a clear time-bound plan to assess and eliminate overcapacity 
using environmental and social criteria;
•
putting in place an effort management system which works regionally and includes all 
gears and waters;
•
adopting precautionary and ecosystem-based target and limit reference points for all 
major tuna and billfish species;
•
closing the loopholes in the fight against Illegal, Unregulated and Unreported (IUU) 
fishing starting by banning at sea transshipments by all vessels including longliners.
In addition, Greenpeace calls on WCPFC parties to ensure the following pressing issues are 
effectively addressed at the upcoming meeting:
•
a strong Conservation and Management Measure (CMM) is agreed that ends bigeye 
tuna overfishing and ensures tropical tuna fisheries are managed according to 
precautionary and ecosystem based principles taking into account the conservation of 
all targeted and associated species;
•
increases in fishing effort in the southern albacore fishery are immediately halted and 
precautionary, zone-based catch limits are established by the Commission;
•
a moratorium on Pacific bluefin tuna fishing is agreed until the stock is recovered and 
effective management measures are in place;
•
effective measures to recover depleted shark populations are taken.
All parties must be prepared to make compromises to reach agreement. What cannot be 
compromised is the future of Pacific tuna stocks.
 – 1 –
Greenpeace Briefing to the 10th Regular Meeting of WCPFC
2. Addressing the most pressing issues
2.1. Produce an effective, clear and enforceable CMM for tropical tunas
Although there have been no new tuna stock assessments in 2013 it is clear from the range of 
fisheries indicators provided for 2012 that the situation for several tuna stocks in the Western and 
Central Pacific continues to deteriorate as effort increases have resulted in record catches in the 
region since 2009.1,2 Overfishing of adult bigeye in the longline fishery, compounded by the increased 
catches of juveniles as bycatch in purse seine fishing on fish aggregating devices (FADs), has 
continued to reduce the bigeye stock to worrying levels. The Scientific Committee warned this year 
that ever-increasing catches are exacerbating this problem.
CMM-2008-01 and subsequent amendments aimed to reduce the high fishing mortality on bigeye 
tuna by 30 per cent from the 2001–2004 average level and limit yellowfin tuna fishing mortality to its 
2001–2004 level. Data presented at Scientific Committee meetings SC7, SC8 and SC9 have made it 
clear that the CMM-2008-01 was insufficient to achieve these goals.3,4 Longline catches of bigeye 
have been reduced from 2001-2004 levels, although they have increased slightly in recent years. In 
the core area of the tropical longline fishery, catch reductions have occurred alongside a decline in 
catch-per-unit-effort (CPUE), and therefore recent catch declines may be, at least in part, due to a 
further decline in the adult bigeye abundance rather than conservation efforts by member States.
Scientific advice indicates that a combination of prohibiting FADs in the purse seine fishery and 
restricting longline fishing in bigeye spawning areas would have the greatest impact on the recovery 
of bigeye tuna. The FAD closures in 2009–2012 resulted in moderately reduced yellowfin and 
skipjack catches and strongly reduced bigeye catches during the closure periods. However, despite 
the closures, the total estimated number of FAD sets made in 2011 was a record high, mainly due to 
increased purse seine effort overall, with a slight decline in set numbers for 2012.
Any proposed replacement of current FAD measures must take into account the burdens of 
monitoring and enforcing FAD closures and the impact FADs may be having during the closure 
period in terms of ‘ghost fishing’. Similarly, the drastic reduction in bigeye catches during FAD closure
months should be the single most important factor to consider when deliberating the new measure. 
The FAD ban must be year-round, to ensure that the benefit of reduced bigeye tuna mortality gained 
during a short-term ban are not lost over the remainder of the year. A full ban will reduce the bycatch 
of juvenile yellowfin and assist in the overall reduction of shark bycatch, most importantly for depleted
oceanic whitetip sharks and silky sharks. This would also most effectively address the unregulated 
nature of capacity creep in the purse seine fleets due to the proliferation of FAD use.
Measures must be agreed too on the longline fishery, through a combination of prohibiting longlining 
in bigeye spawning areas, closing the high seas pockets to all longline fishing and further reducing 
fishing effort and capacity within all longline fleets within the remaining high seas and Exclusive 
Economic Zones (EEZs).
The following components should be included in the new CMM on tropical tunas:
•
an objective to reduce fishing mortality of bigeye by 50 per cent from 2011 levels including 
further cuts to both longline and purse seine bigeye catches;
•
the closure of all four high seas pockets to all fishing as a permanent measure;
1
Harley S, Williams P (2013). A compendium of fisheries indicators for bigeye, skipjack, yellowfin, and south Pacific 
albacore tunas. Ninth Regular Session of the Science Committee, WCPFC, 6–14 August 2012, Pohnpei, Federated 
States of Micronesia. WCPFC-SC9-2013/SA-WP-06. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/7487.
2
Williams P, Terawasi P (2013). Overview of tuna fisheries in the western and central Pacific Ocean, including economic 
conditions. Ninth Regular Session of the Science Committee, WCPFC, 6–14 August 2012, Pohnpei, Federated States of
Micronesia. WCPFC-SC9-2013/GN-WP-01. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/7199.
3
Hampton J, Harley S, Williams P (2012). Review of the implementation and effectiveness of key management measures
for tropical tuna. Eighth Regular Session of the Science Committee, WCPFC. 7–15 August 2012, Busan, Republic of 
Korea. WCPFC-SC8-2012/MI-WP-06. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/5395.
4
Pilling G, Williams P, Hampton J, Harley S (2013). Analysis of the implementation and effectiveness of key management
measures for tropical tunas. Ninth Regular Session of the Science Committee, WCPFC, 6–14 August 2013, Pohnpei, 
Federated States of Micronesia. WCPFC-SC9-2013/MI-WP-01. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/3676.
 – 2 –
Greenpeace Briefing to the 10th Regular Meeting of WCPFC
•
application of a revised vessel day scheme (VDS) which includes the longline fleet targeting 
tropical tunas to ensure an effective reduction and control of fishing effort;
•
adoption and implementation of a year-round ban on the use of FADs in association with 
purse seine fishing in order to help address excess fishing capacity, reduce catches of 
juvenile bigeye and yellowfin tuna, and reduce bycatch of other vulnerable species.
2.2. Safeguard albacore tuna
Greenpeace again reiterates concern over the increasing number of small to medium scale longliners
operating only on the high seas targeting albacore. These vessels place an increasing burden on this
stock and contribute very little to the economies of adjacent Pacific coastal States as they compete 
with domestic and locally-owned fleets. Although albacore stocks are still considered to be relatively 
healthy, the Scientific Committee has consistently cautioned against further increases in catch on the 
basis that they would reduce vulnerable biomass (larger adults) and therefore decrease catch rates 
and profitability.
Despite these warnings, both catch and effort have increased significantly in recent years. Stock 
assessments have shown a declining spawning biomass. Greenpeace urges the Commission to 
immediately halt any increase in effort in the southern albacore fishery until precautionary, 
zone-based catch limits, are established by the Commission that takes into account the rights of 
adjacent small island coastal States whose small economies are dependent on this fishery.
2.3. Conserve shark populations
Greenpeace calls on the Commission to urgently address the status of shark populations including by
addressing impacts on them by all gears. Although sharks are often described as ‘bycatch’ in longline
fisheries, it is clear from the common use of practices that deliberately increase shark catches that 
more longline fisheries should be described as ‘mixed fisheries’ targeting tuna, sharks and billfish. 
These include the use of wire tracers, shark lines, and bait that attracts sharks5 and crew payment 
structures that incentivise shark finning.6
Oceanic whitetip sharks and silky sharks, despite the poor data available, are likely to be in a very 
poor state, with fishing rates well in excess of the FMSY and with stocks declines to well below SBMSY.7,8
In the case of silky sharks, the greatest impact on the stock is attributed to bycatch from the longline 
fishery, but there are also significant impacts from the associated purse seine fishery which catches 
predominantly juveniles. The fishing mortality from the associated purse seine fishery is itself above 
FMSY.  Initial attempts to provide stock assessments for blue sharks this year have again highlighted 
extremely poor data available on shark catches. Even then, several models do indicate that this 
heavily exploited North Pacific stock may be in an overfished state.9 SC9 recommended that a 
revised assessment be presented at SC10 and, in the interim, the Commission should adopt the 
precautionary approach when considering potential management measures for this stock.10
Given the importance of sharks in the Pacific ecosystem, and the continuing poor availability of data, 
this Commission should agree on:
•
a total prohibition of the retention, transhipment, storage, on-board sale and landing of silky 
5
Bromhead D, Rice J, Harley S (2013). Analyses of the potential influence of four gear factors (leader type, hook type, 
“shark” lines and bait type) on shark catch rates in WCPO tuna longline fisheries. Ninth Regular Session of the Science 
Committee, 6–14 August 2013, Pohnpei, FSM. WCPFC-SC9-2013/EB-WP-02 rev 1. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/7581.
6
Turagabeci I (2013). Sharks are target fisheries. The Fiji Times Online. 24 June 2013. http://bit.ly/1eiFovL.
7
Rice J, Harley S (2012). Stock assessment of oceanic whitetip sharks in the western and central Pacific Ocean. Ninth 
Regular Session of the Science Committee, WCPFC, 6–14 August 2013, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia. 
WCPFC. WCPFC-SC-2012/SA-WP-06. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/3235.
8
Rice J, Harley S (2013). Updated stock assessment of silky sharks in the western and central Pacific Ocean. Ninth 
Regular Session of the Science Committee, WCPFC, 6–14 August 2013, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia. 
WCPFC-SC9-2013/SA-WP-03. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/3236.
9
Rice J, Harley S, Maunder M, Da-Silva AA (2013). Stock assessment of blue shark in the north Pacific Ocean using 
Stock Synthesis. Ninth Regular Session of the Science Committee, WCPFC, 6–14 August 2013, Pohnpei, Federated 
States of Micronesia. WCPFC-SC9-2013/SA-WP-02. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/7483.
10 See paragraphs 270–3: SC9 (2013). Summary Report. Scientific Committee Ninth Regular Session, 6–14 August 2013,
Pohnpei, FSM. Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC). http://www.wcpfc.int/node/4914.
 – 3 –
Greenpeace Briefing to the 10th Regular Meeting of WCPFC
sharks, and blue sharks, as well as for oceanic whitetip sharks, until such time that stock 
assessments are of sufficient quality to demonstrate healthy stock levels;
•
the prompt and careful release of any captured silky sharks, oceanic whitetip sharks, and blue
sharks;
•
a ban on the use of wire tracers on longlines, as well as a ban on the use of short branch 
lines set directly from longline floats;
•
a ban on the use of FADs in association with purse seine fishing in order to help address 
bycatch of silky sharks and oceanic whitetip sharks;
•
measures to urgently improve the quality and quantity of data for all sharks, including animal 
condition on release (dead, injured, alive);
•
the development of reference points, best practice bycatch mitigation measures, and 
management goals for all non-target species, especially sharks;
•
a requirement to land all sharks with fins naturally attached as recommended by the 
Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks.11
2.4. Rescue Pacific bluefin tuna
This year SC9 had the opportunity to review the 2012 Pacific bluefin tuna assessment12 presented by
the International Scientific Committee for Tuna and Tuna-like Species in the North Pacific Ocean 
(ISC). The report suggests a catastrophic depletion of Pacific bluefin down to 4 per cent of the 
unfished biomass, with continued overfishing of all age-classes including an extremely high mortality 
rate for juveniles of 90 per cent. Although consensus was not reached, the majority of SC9 
recommended an urgent reduction of fishing mortality, especially on juveniles, and that limit and 
target reference points be agreed that are consistent with the Commission’s adopted or default 
reference points. The Inter-American tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC) has adopted a catch limit for
the eastern Pacific; however, there have been no limits set by the WCPFC for the western Pacific, 
where the vast majority of catches are taken.
Given the dire state of the Pacific bluefin tuna population, Greenpeace calls on the 
Commission to agree on a moratorium on all directed Pacific bluefin tuna fishing until such 
time that a management plan is agreed and implemented, and the stock has shown 
conclusive evidence of recovery to levels above an agreed biomass limit reference point.
3. Building the basis for sustainable tuna fisheries management in the region
Indicators from the 9th Regular Session of the WCPFC Science Committee (SC9) have revealed an 
alarming picture of the current fishing capacity in the convention area.13 The elimination of fishing 
overcapacity is one of the most serious challenges facing all tuna Regional Fisheries Management 
Organisations (RFMOs) – purse seine and longline vessel numbers, capacity and overall fishing 
effort are at an all-time high in the WCPO.14,15 Since the introduction of CMM-2008-01 there has been
an increase in purse seine effort. Effort peaked in 2011, however VMS data shows that effort in 2012 
was 8 per cent higher than 2010 levels, and similar to 2011 effort levels. In addition, the efficiency of 
the effort has increased and there appears to have been a change in how days are reported – i.e. 
11
See http://sharksmou.org.
12 ISC Pacific Bluefin Tuna Working Group (2013). Stock assessment of Pacific bluefin tuna in 2012 (Rev 1). Ninth 
Regular Session of the Science Committee, WCPFC, 6–14 August 2013, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia. 
WCPFC-SC9-2013/SA-WP-10. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/3668.
13 See: Greenpeace (2013). Greenpeace Briefing to the Ninth Regular Session of the WCPFC Science Committee (SC9). 
Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia, 6–14 August 2013. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/4834.
14 Harley S, Williams P (2013). A compendium of fisheries indicators for bigeye, skipjack, yellowfin, and south Pacific 
albacore tunas. Ninth Regular Session of the Science Committee, WCPFC, 6–14 August 2012, Pohnpei, Federated 
States of Micronesia. WCPFC-SC9-2013/SA-WP-06. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/7487.
15 Williams P, Terawasi P (2013). Overview of tuna fisheries in the western and central Pacific Ocean, including economic 
conditions. Ninth Regular Session of the Science Committee, WCPFC, 6–14 August 2012, Pohnpei, Federated States 
of Micronesia. WCPFC-SC9-2013/GN-WP-01. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/7199.
 – 4 –
Greenpeace Briefing to the 10th Regular Meeting of WCPFC
days that were previously reported as 'searching days' (counted as fishing days) are now reported as
'transit days (counted as non-fishing days).16 Overcapacity is a main driver of overfishing. Fishing 
capacity management schemes mostly deal with amount of capacity (such as vessel numbers and 
size, engine power), but rarely, if ever, with the type of vessel and its gear and their environmental 
and social impacts.
3.1. Eliminate overcapacity
Greenpeace has just produced the report Managing Fishing Capacity in the Western and Central 
Pacific Tuna Fisheries which outlines a process by which the appropriate amount and type of 
capacity can be first identified in the WCPO and the least environmentally and socially sustainable 
capacity can be eliminated.
Work to eliminate overcapacity must provide for the equitable allocation of access to resources using 
a set of transparent and equitable environmental and social criteria that ensure the rights of 
developing coastal States and communities to participate in, and benefit from, tuna fisheries. 
Greenpeace is advocating that coastal States develop domestic tuna fisheries based on selective 
fishing techniques that are more suitable for use by coastal communities and have a lower impact on 
the ecosystem in terms of limiting bycatch.17 In doing so, the rights and needs of developing coastal 
States could be addressed at the same time replacing more unsustainable distant water fishing 
capacity in the region.
Greenpeace is calling on the Commission to urgently agree to cap the number of longline and 
purse seine vessels in the fishery and prioritise the development of a clear, time-bound plan 
to assess and eliminate overcapacity in the WCPO that takes into consideration social and 
environmental criteria for reducing overcapacity in tuna fisheries.18 This process should identify 
the most environmentally and socially appropriate type and amount of fishing capacity that should be 
allowed in a given fishery so as to manage it sustainably. This could constitute the basis for a scheme
which would grant preferential access to vessels and gears which score the highest. Further 
allocation of the right to fish to individual operators should be based on a participatory and 
transparent decision-making framework, and should exclude those with poor records of reporting and
compliance. Local fishing communities fulfilling the criteria should have primary access.
Greenpeace recommends that the following criteria be adopted within the plan to eliminate 
overcapacity from WCPO tuna fisheries, to guide decisions on which vessels and fleets should be 
granted the fishing opportunities available under a precautionary management model:
•
Selectivity – fishing methods with low by-catch;
•
Environmental impact – less destructive fishing methods;
•
Energy consumption – vessels and fishing methods consuming less energy per tonne of 
fish caught;
•
Employment and working conditions – fishing methods that provide more and better 
employment conditions, compliant with international standards;
•
Socio economic benefits – greater direct income to and investment in the region derived 
from the fishing operations;
•
Quality of product – gear types providing the best quality of fish for human consumption;
•
History of compliance – past compliance with applicable rules, including quality of data 
provided by fishers as well as member states should be considered when granting access to 
a fishery.
16 Pilling G, Williams P, Hampton J, Harley S (2013). Analysis of the implementation and effectiveness of key management
measures for tropical tunas. Ninth Regular Session of the Science Committee, WCPFC, 6–14 August 2013, Pohnpei, 
Federated States of Micronesia. WCPFC-SC9-2013/MI-WP-01. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/3676.
17 Greenpeace (2013). Transforming Tuna Fisheries in Pacific Island Countries. http://bit.ly/19B8ItQ.
18 These include selectivity; environmental impact; energy consumption; employment and working conditions; 
socioeconomic benefits; quality of the product; and history of compliance, among others.
 – 5 –
Greenpeace Briefing to the 10th Regular Meeting of WCPFC
3.2. Ensure effective effort management
Limits to both capacity and effort are required. As long as excess fishing capacity in terms of physical 
assets (vessels, etc) exists, vessels owners and companies will continue to exert political pressure to
ensure that they obtain maximum fisheries access to remain financially viable, and will maintain a 
situation where breaking the rules is seen as a necessary risk. 
Currently the main tool to manage fishing effort in the WCPO is the Parties to the Nauru Agreement 
(PNA) Vessel Day Scheme (VDS). Due to several exemptions to the system as well as its current 
scope (it only applies to the EEZs of PNA members), the VDS has not managed, to date, to prevent 
an expansion of both fishing capacity and effort in the region. Greenpeace believes that in order to be
effective as a fisheries management tool19 the VDS must be expanded in its scope and include all 
fishing effort in the region (including all gears and all waters).20 A stringent monitoring and penalty 
system must also be put into place and enforced.
In addition, Greenpeace warns that a well-functioning VDS doesn't remove the need for capacity 
management. In the absence of capacity management consistent with environmental and social 
access and allocation criteria, a reduced number of days available under the VDS alone would expel 
the least financially strong operators, potentially benefiting the most industrial or heavily subsidised 
operations that can bid at higher prices for VDS days.
To avoid such an outcome, the VDS should be applied after preferential access has been granted to 
local fishing communities operating in a sustainable manner. Greater economic benefits for coastal 
states can be derived from their own local fisheries, as opposed to foreign access fees, making this 
an even more economically beneficial option in the long term. Following allocation of local fishing 
opportunities, any remaining vessel days could be sold to operators best fulfilling the environmental 
and social criteria and contributing the most to sustainable livelihoods in the region, as opposed to 
simple financial contribution of access fees as is the current practice.
3.3. Adopt precautionary target and limit reference points
Setting strong fisheries reference points and strict harvest control rules is a key part of implementing 
the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and the UN Fish Stocks Agreement. Some of 
the work carried out so far at the WCPFC on choosing and setting target and limit reference points is 
described in more detail in the Greenpeace submission to the SC9.21
Greenpeace considers progress in this area to be crucial for the future success of the Commission. 
Both target and limit reference points need to be precautionary and the risk of breaching a reference 
point needs to be very low. While ultimately the assurance that limit reference points are not 
breached by fisheries depends on choosing good target reference points and strong harvest control 
rules, and on swift action by management, Greenpeace also believes that a ‘sea change’ in how 
managers (and industry) perceive and understand target and limit reference points is key to gaining 
agreement for significantly improving management of Pacific fisheries.
The Commission has previously adopted the biomass limit reference points (LRPs) for tuna and 
striped marlin recommended by the Scientific Committee in 2012 (SC8). Greenpeace urges the 
Commission to adopt the recommendations of SC9 to select fishing mortality limit reference points for
each species that ensure a high probability that biomass LRPs will not be breached.22 Greenpeace 
supports the selection of a 5 per cent acceptable risk level for all species (i.e. 95% probability of 
maintaining the stock above biomass LRPs). Greenpeace further urges the Commission to set limit 
and target reference points for all species managed by the WCPFC.
19 The VDS has been undoubtedly effective as a tool to increase the revenue obtained by PNA countries from the tuna 
resources in their EEZs.
20 This is in addition to solving some known issues such as the definition of fishing days.
21 Greenpeace (2013). Greenpeace Briefing to the Ninth Regular Session of the WCPFC Science Committee (SC9). 
Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia, 6–14 August 2013. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/4834.
22 See paragraphs 367–73: SC9 (2013). Summary Report. Scientific Committee Ninth Regular Session, 6–14 August 
2013, Pohnpei, FSM. Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC). http://www.wcpfc.int/node/4914.
 – 6 –
Greenpeace Briefing to the 10th Regular Meeting of WCPFC
3.4. Tackle illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing
At-sea transhipments continue to represent one of the most important loopholes assisting IUU 
operations. Greenpeace ship expeditions in 2006, 2008, 2009, 2011 and 2012 repeatedly 
demonstrated the extensive and pernicious nature of IUU fishing in the region and the role that these 
high seas areas play in facilitating illegal fishing. 
Following the closure of two high seas pockets (HSPs) to purse seine fishing since 1 January 2010, 
purse seine fishing effort remained largely concentrated in EEZs until 2012. In 2012 there was an 
increase in the amount of purse seine effort in the HSPs attributed to transit activity and/or to effort by
the Philippines vessels permitted under CMM 2011-01. Governments and domestic longline fleets in 
the central Pacific have indicated their concern over international fleets operating solely in the 
eastern high seas pocket and using this as a platform to tranship catch out of the region.
In 2012, a high seas boarding and inspection patrol boarded 11 vessels in this pocket and detected 
violations on six of these, including non-reporting of entry.23 In 2013, 11 vessels were boarded again 
and six of these vessels were found in violation of existing CMMs again including for non-reporting of 
entry into the high seas pocket, as required under the special management measure.
The re-opening of high seas pockets 1 and 2 at WCPFC-8 came with a number of pre-conditions 
including the need for better monitoring of fleets and strict implementation of and compliance with 
monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS) measures. Subsequent activities by Philippine vessels in 
high seas pocket 1 and neighbouring EEZs reveal a number of concerning issues.
Since the Technical and Compliance Committee's meeting TCC-8 in 2012, Greenpeace documented 
a raft of IUU activities and other anomalies by vessels fishing in high seas pocket 1, including 
Philippine flagged vessels. These were reported to the Commission24,25 in Manila in December 2012. 
However, despite the clear documentation, those cases somehow did not prevent the Philippines 
from receiving a good rating for compliance at TCC-9. The activities documented included an 
unlicensed Philippine fishing vessel Sal 19 transshipping illegally on the high seas, failure by a 
licensed high seas seiner Geneviva to report via VMS to the adjacent coastal states as required 
under Philippine regulations and no VMS reporting at all by Sal 19. Upon approach by Greenpeace, 
the IUU transshipment was halted and three of the vessels involved fled into Indonesia's EEZ, Sal 19 
was spotted eight days later in Palau's EEZ with its name painted over, not reporting on either VMS 
or AIS and with no log book or other fishing or transhipment records. Furthermore, Greenpeace and 
Palauan authorities, while on joint patrol of Palau's EEZ in November 2012 discovered a number of 
illegally deployed anchored FADs within Palau waters near the high seas border, similar in 
construction to those being deployed by the Philippine purse seiners on the high seas.
Those blatant IUU activities highlight the need to phase out the exemption for Philippine purse 
seiners to fish in the high seas, and call into question the rigour of the compliance assessment 
process being followed by TCC. At the very least, compliance discussions should be open to 
accredited observers; and the country whose compliance is being discussed – while having the 
opportunity to respond to issues raised – should not be able to block consensus on a poor score. 
Furthermore, all reported IUU incidents from any source should be included in the next TCC 
compliance discussion, and placed on a public record.
Greenpeace calls on the Commission to recommend that all four high seas pockets be permanently 
closed to all forms of fishing, as part of a new conservation measure for skipjack, yellowfin and 
bigeye. This must include a phase out of the Philippine purse seine fleet from the high seas pocket 
during the life-time of the tropical tuna CMM as part of a national plan to reduce overcapacity and 
ensure sustainable fisheries also inside Philippine EEZ. Bunkering and at-sea transhipments should 
be banned. In addition the Commission’s Compliance Monitoring Scheme (CMS), currently in its third
trial year, must be strengthened and a strict penalty and sanctions regime must be applied in all 
23 TCC (2013). Annual Report on Eastern High Seas Pocket Special Management Area Reporting.Technical and 
Compliance Committee Ninth Regular Session, 26 Sept–1 Oct 2013, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia. 
WCPFC-TCC9-2013-RP07. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/5055.
24 Pirate report: Illegal transshipment in high seas pocket 1 http://bit.ly/Syxxi2.
25 Greenpeace International findings at sea, November 2012 http://bit.ly/Vj8637.
 – 7 –
Greenpeace Briefing to the 10th Regular Meeting of WCPFC
cases of non-compliance. Failure to comply must be linked to loss of access, thereby contributing to 
the process of reducing fishing capacity.
In addition to closing the high seas pockets to fishing and banning transshipments at sea, the 
WCPFC must also act to create a meaningful disincentive to IUU fishing. It is of extreme concern that
some vessels and fleets appear to have made IUU fishing part of their business model, despite 
repeated settlement payments. In many cases, the value of the tuna catch and level of subsidies 
received by the vessel or company mean that those settlements, although significant, are not alone 
enough to change behaviour.
The WCPFC must remove the secrecy surrounding compliance discussions, and place all IUU 
activity from the past year onto the public record, regardless of whether settlement has been reached
or a vessel is blacklisted. This enables legal and ethical traders to avoid buying fish that may have 
been stolen from Pacific Island countries. Furthermore, IUU compliance records must be a criterion 
within a transparent system of evaluating vessels and companies before fishing access is granted. 
When capacity reduction is a critical task ahead of the Commission, those vessels that have 
repeatedly violated CMMs should be the first to be removed from the fishery.
3.5. Operate with transparency
Greenpeace, together with other non-government organisations, has expressed its concern at the 
disturbing trend regarding the level of transparency and openness in WCPFC meetings and 
information sharing by the Commission. This includes the increasing number of closed sessions, 
documents being posted on the secure website unavailable to organisations with accredited observer
status, and draft meeting reports being sent only to member states and not to other organisations 
that attended and contributed to those meetings.
We recognise the need, under exceptional circumstances, for documents or discussions to be 
restricted – as provided for under the WCPFC's rules. However we believe that currently much of this
information is unnecessarily limited and too many discussions are inappropriately designated as 
confidential. The WCPFC is no longer following best practice by RFMOs with regards to 
transparency, and we urge an improvement at WCPFC-10 and in future meetings and working 
groups.
3.6. Share the burdens and benefits
The WCPFC Convention Article 30 states “the need to ensure that such measures do not result in 
transferring, directly or indirectly, a disproportionate burden of conservation action onto developing 
States Parties, and territories and possessions” and this issue has been raised in regard to the 
replacement measure for 2008-01. In order to address this, a compensation payment has been 
suggested by Pacific Island States. Greenpeace urges all Parties:
•
to ensure that this discussion does not delay the agreement of a strong replacement measure
to protect tropical tunas, from which all parties will share the benefits;
•
to approach the discussion of a new measure for tropical tunas prepared to accept cuts and 
to seek compromise for the long-term benefit of the fisheries.
Any compensation arrangement agreed should be adopted only as a step towards ultimately 
ensuring that the benefits of all sectors of the fishery, and therefore the benefits from stock 
conservation, are better directed towards Small Island Developing States. An alternative model for 
the development of such an arrangement is outlined in the Greenpeace report Transforming Tuna 
Fisheries in Pacific Island Countries.
For further information please contact: 
Lagi Toribau
Head of Greenpeace Delegation to WCPFC-10
lagi.toribau@greenpeace.org
 – 8 –
