 
COMMISSION  
SIXTEENTH REGULAR SESSION  
Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea 
5 - 11 December 2019 
Global Sustainability Appeal NGO Tuna Forum   
                                                                                                                                 WCPFC16-2019-OP18 
09 December  
 
 
 
 
Submitted by ISSF  
on behalf of various  
NGO’s,  
Seafood Companies 
& Fishing Industry Associations 
 
 
 
 
1 
5 December, 2019 
ATTN: Heads of Delegation to IOTC, IATTC, ICCAT and WCPFC 
Dear Delegates: 
Building on the Global Advocacy Appeal submitted to tuna RFMOs in 2018, this letter is submitted on 
behalf of the undersigned companies, non-governmental organizations and fishing industry associations, 
all of whom recognize that the sustainability of tuna stocks is integral to businesses and livelihoods, as 
well as to the health of the marine environment. 
Your government serves as an important leader in tuna stock sustainability as a member of one or more 
of the four regional fisheries management organizations (RFMOs) charged with managing the world’s 
tropical tuna fisheries.  We are writing to bring to your attention our collective views on several issues 
crucial to the long-term sustainability of tuna stocks: 
•
The development and implementation of comprehensive, precautionary harvest strategies
•
Effective monitoring and management of fish aggregating devices (FADs)
•
Strengthened monitoring, control and surveillance tools, including increased observer
coverage in purse seine and longline fisheries, and of at-sea transshipment activity through
human observers and/or electronic monitoring
•
Greater focus on implementation of bycatch mitigation actions, with an emphasis on longline
fisheries
We recognize that some tuna RFMOs have made progress on several of these issues and we applaud 
those actions. However, we wish to underscore that while the progress to-date is positive, accelerated 
actions must be taken at this year’s RFMO meetings to: 
1.
Develop and implement comprehensive, precautionary harvest strategies with specific timelines
for all tuna stocks, including the adoption and implementation of target and limit reference
points, harvest control rules, monitoring strategies, operational objectives, performance
indicators, management strategy evaluation, and appropriate tools to achieve exploitation
levels;
2.
Increase compliance with mandatory minimum 5% longline observer coverage rates by
identifying and sanctioning non-compliance;
3.
Adopt and implement a 100% observer coverage requirement – human and/or electronic –
within five years for longline and purse seine fisheries (where not already required);
2 
4.
Adopt and implement a 100% observer coverage requirement – human and/or electronic – for
at-sea transshipment activities, as well as other measures – as defined in the Best Practices for
Well-Managed At-Sea Transshipment document developed through the NGO Tuna Forum – that
ensure transshipment activity is transparent and well-managed, and that all required data is
fully collected and sent to the appropriate bodies in a timely manner;
5.
Require the use of the best-available observer safety equipment, communications and
procedures on fishing and transshipment vessels;
6.
Develop and implement science-based recommendations for the effective management of FADs
– as defined in the Best Practices for Well-Managed FAD Fisheries document developed through
the NGO Tuna Forum – and integrate FAD-based information into stock assessments to reduce
uncertainties;
7.
Implement adopted measures for the use of non-entangling FAD designs as a precautionary
measure to minimize the entanglement of sharks and other non-target species, and transition to
the use of biodegradable materials to mitigate marine debris;
8.
More effectively implement, and ensure compliance with, existing RFMO bycatch requirements
and take additional mitigation action, such as improving monitoring at sea, collecting and
sharing operational-level, species-specific data, and adopting stronger compliance measures,
including consequences for non-compliance for all gear types.
We believe these measures will positively impact the long-term sustainability of tuna stocks and the 
overall health of the marine ecosystem. 
The companies that have signed this letter represent major seafood buyers that source seafood 
products from a diverse, international supply network. 
The non-governmental organizations work in more than 100 countries and engage suppliers and provide 
advice to retailers, buyers and food service companies regarding improvements in tuna sustainability. 
The fishing industry associations represent a variety of gear types, including purse seine, longline, troll, 
pole and line, and handline vessels active in tuna fisheries worldwide. 
Collectively, we request that your government, as a member of one or more of the tuna RFMOs, take 
active steps to ensure significant progress on these issues at each of the relevant RFMO meetings in 
2019, as a matter of priority. 
Sincerely, 
3 
Gavin van Der Burgh, CEO 
Hugo Byrnes, VP of Product Integrity 
Anthony Snow, Seafood Director 
Rayk Mende, Managing Director Corporate 
Responsibility 
Philipp Ilbertz 
Director Corporate Responsibility 
Helen Packer, Sustainability Manager
Casey R. Marion, Director of Sustainability 
Dr Cleo Small, Head of BirdLife International 
Marine Programme 
4 
Dr. Luciano Pirovano, Sustainable Development 
Director 
Michael Scola, President/Controller 
Jan Tharp, Interim CEO 
Vincent BARTHELEMY, Group Quality Director 
Chris Wirges, CEO 
Catherine Weller, Senior Lawyer, Head of 
Biodiversity Programme 
Ron Schindler, President 
5 
Anni Mikkelsen, CSR and QA-QC Manager 
Dr. Luciano Pirovano, Sustainable Development 
Director 
Michael McNicholas, Managing Director 
Dean Holzer, President 
Katie Schleit, Senior Marine Campaign Coordinator  
Nguyen Huu Huy Hoang
6 
Tobias Aguirre, Chief Executive Officer 
Sean J. O'Scannlain, President & CEO 
Jose Aller, Sustainability Manager 
Mr. Teddy Kho, VP-General Manager, General 
Tuna Corporation 
7 
Andy Shen, Senior Oceans Advisor 
Kerry A. Umamoto, President/ COO 
Brett Bremser, Executive VP & Chief 
Merchandising Officer 
Tim Lycke, President 
Martin Purves, Managing Director 
Susan Jackson, President 
Dr. Luciano Pirovano, Sustainable Development 
Director 
8 
Angeles Claro, Sustainability Manager 
Lisa Zwack, Head of Sustainability, The Kroger 
Co. 
Sam Chou, CEO 
Jennifer Lambert, Senior Manager, 
Sustainability  
Amber Madley, CSR Manager 
Steve McLean, Head of Technology: Agriculture, 
Fisheries & Procurement 
Robert Bleu, President 
Isabelle Aelvoet, Global Sustainability Director 
9 
Margarita Muñoz, Directora Responsabilidad 
Social  
Steven Butts, Heads of Corporate Services, 
Corporate Responsibility 
Adam Peasey, Managing Director 
Charles W. Laidley, Ph.D., Director of Food 
Safety & Fisheries Sustainability 
Alex-Hung H. Tran
President & CEO
10 
William F.A. Stride, President 
Julio Morón, Director Gerente 
John Steinmetz, Vice President of Business 
Development 
Dr. Luciano Pirovano, Sustainable Development 
Director 
Cameron Mackintosh, Managing Director 
Dr. Luciano Pirovano, Sustainable Development 
Director 
11 
Gorka Aspuru, General Manager 
Dr. Luciano Pirovano, Sustainable Development 
Director 
Stephen Fisher, Sustainability Director 
Michael Rosetta, Manager of Compliance and 
Quality Control  
Michael Berkowitz, CEO 
Hamish Walker, Chief Operating Officer 
12 
Neil Barrett, Senior Vice President Corporate 
Responsibility 
Andrew Choe, President & CEO 
Richard Stavis, Chief Sustainability Officer 
Ruth Westcott, Coordinator of Sustainable Fish 
Cities 
Alexia Morgan, Science Lead, Tuna and Large 
Pelagic Species 
Yann Vallée, Quality Director Sysco France 
Amanda Nusz: Vice President, Product Quality 
& Responsible Sourcing 
13 
Kevin Bixler, Global Director, Group Fish 
Procurement 
Mark Zimring, Director, Indo-Pacific Tuna 
Program 
Rachel Hopkins, Senior Manager, International 
Fisheries 
Renato Curto, President and CEO 
Robert Bleu, President 
Robert Bleu, President 
14 
Craig Price, Chief Executive – Commercial, Fish 
VICTORIA HARRIS 
Partner & Head of CSR, Health & 
Agriculture 
William Carvalho, President 
John Burton, CEO 
William W Fox, Jr., PhD, VP, Tuna Fisheries 
Conservation 
Winston L. Chance
