1 
 
 
COMMISSION 
 ELEVENTH REGULAR SESSION  
Faleata Sports Complex, Apia, SAMOA  
1 - 5 December 2014 
Greenpeace briefing paper for WCPFC11  
WCPFC11-2014-OP11 
20 November 2014 
Paper by Greenpeace 
 
 
 
1 
 
Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission 
Eleventh Regular Session of the Commission 
Apia, Samoa, 1 – 5 December, 2014 
 
 
1. Summary 
Greenpeace welcomes the opportunity to attend the 11th meeting of the Western and Central 
Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) as an observer. The outcome of the recent WCPFC 
Science Committee meeting, in particular the poor state of bigeye and Pacific bluefin stocks, is 
the predictable result of the failure of members of this Commission to uphold the mandate 
stipulated under Articles 5 and 6 of the Convention to apply the precautionary approach, 
including through acting upon the best available scientific advice, in adopting conservation and 
management measures (CMMs) for key tuna species.1 The overfishing occurring on these critical 
tuna stocks is a direct result of the continued expansion of fishing fleets, increasing fishing 
capacity and effort, through the use of FADs in particular, and increasing non-compliance.  
Two of the Pacific’s vital tuna stocks are now at dangerously low levels: the Pacific bluefin tuna 
population is estimated to be at 4.3% and bigeye tuna at 16% of its original spawning biomass2. 
The Commission must prioritise efforts towards rebuilding these stocks. While the other tuna 
species, skipjack, yellowfin and albacore, are at somewhat higher biomass levels there are 
warning signs that all three of these stocks are also in trouble; from observed localised depletion 
or range contraction of skipjack and yellowfin to widespread economic deterioration of domestic 
fisheries for South Pacific albacore. The commission can't afford to be the ambulance at the 
bottom of the cliff, and must develop precautionary targets and harvest control rules to restore 
all the fisheries in its mandate to full health and productivity. 
Greenpeace therefore calls on the members of the WCPFC to urgently adopt the following 
measures: 
 
1. Ensure full compliance with data provision requirements as a fundamental basis for 
the work of the Commission and agree on decreased fishing opportunities in 2015 
for those parties failing to comply with these provisions. Greenpeace welcomes the 
FFA proposal for a Conservation and Management Measure for the Provision of 
Operational Level Data by all CCMs and hopes that WCPFC parties will go further and act 
strongly on this fundamental issue. Greenpeace urges China, Japan, Korea and Taiwan to 
remedy their non-compliance on this issue;  
 
2. Adopt interim target reference points (TRPs) of 50% SBF=0 for skipjack, bigeye and 
yellowfin, and 70% for albacore until final TRPs are agreed by the Commission no later 
than 2017. Greenpeace supports the FFA proposed replacement for the conservation and 
management measure on establishing a harvest strategy for key tuna species in the 
Western and Central Pacific Ocean;  
 
                                                             
1 
WCPFC Convention Article 5. Principles and measures for conservation and management; Article 6. Application of 
the precautionary approach. https://www.wcpfc.int/system/files/text.pdf 
2  WCPFC (2014). Summary Report. Scientific Committee Tenth Regular Session, 6–14 Aug 2013, Majuro, Republic 
of the Marshall Islands. https://www.wcpfc.int/node/19472 
 
2 
3. Adopt a moratorium on targeted fishing for Pacific bluefin tuna; 
 
4. Agree a new recovery plan for bigeye tuna that brings existing fishing capacity and 
effort in line with precautionary mortality limits to end overfishing and allow for the 
quickest possible recovery of the stock. Greenpeace believes that in order to achieve 
such objectives a full ban on the use of FADs, a reduction in both longline and purse 
effort, and closure of the high seas pockets to all tuna fishing is required;  
 
5. Adopt a Conservation and Management Measure for South Pacific albacore that 
sets the basis for reducing capacity in the fishery and puts catches in line with 
precautionary mortality levels. Greenpeace believes such measure could build on the 
FFA proposal and must ensure that both fishing capacity and catches are brought down 
to biologically and economically sustainable levels. Greenpeace recommends that in 
agreeing the necessary reduction in total catches in the albacore fishery, priority should 
be given to reducing fishing opportunities available to CCMs that are not complying with 
data provision requirements. 
 
6. Strengthen the Commission’s response to non-compliance and IUU fishing in 
particular by urgently adopting a Compliance Monitoring Scheme (CMS) and ensuring 
that transparency is restored to this process in line with that of other RFMOs, particularly 
regarding the public availability of compliance documents. Greenpeace recommends that 
the annual assessment of obligations is focused on priorities identified using a risk based 
approach. For the 2015 assessment of compliance, we suggest prioritising: 
 
a. Failure to provide operational level data 
b. Repeated non-compliance 
c. Violation of the FAD closure period 
d. Exceeding catch and effort limits 
e. Transhipment 
 
7. Adopt a strengthened CMM for sharks to eliminate shark targeting techniques and 
other fishing methods with high shark bycatch, and follow international best practice (fins 
naturally attached landings) to combat shark fining.   
 
 
2. Violation of the convention: non-provision of operational level data 
Commission members agreed 10 years ago to cooperate, including through the provision of 
necessary data, as an obligation to being a party to the Convention. To date, four CCMs namely 
China, Japan, Korea and Taiwan, continue to withhold data on the operations of their fleets in the 
high seas. This is an unacceptable situation that undermines the work of the scientific 
community and the credibility of management advice made available to the Commission and 
thwarts efforts to combat IUU fishing. In summary, it makes a mockery of this Commission. This 
is a serious breach in the obligations of CCMs as stipulated under article 5(b) & article 5(i) of the 
Convention. 
The first meeting of the Scientific Committee of the Commission in 2005 concluded that “access 
to operational level data was absolutely necessary to interpret historical changes in the longline 
fishery” and recommended data rules including standards for operational data that were adopted 
by WCPFC2. CCMs have now had nine years in which to address any domestic legal constraints 
to apply these measures, and there is simply no plausible excuse for any CCM that has failed to 
do so. 
 
3 
The Commission must ensure full compliance with data provision requirements as a fundamental 
basis for its work and agree on decreased fishing opportunities in 2015 for those parties failing to 
comply with these provisions. Article 20 of the Convention gives guidance to the Commission 
exercising its decision-making provisions in order to improve CCM compliance. Article 10 
Paragraph 3 (e) of the Convention requires the Commission to take into account data provision 
by CCMs in determining criteria for the allocation of TACs or TAEs. The Commission should also 
look at the option of imposing mandatory regional observer coverage as a mitigating measure to 
gather the necessary operational data. Greenpeace supports the adoption of the FFA proposal 
for a Conservation and Management Measure for the Provision of Operational Data. 
 
3. Target Reference Points and Harvest Control Rules 
The Commission agreed to use a hierarchical 3-level framework to define appropriate limit 
reference points (LRPs) for stocks based on the level of biological information available. For 
skipjack, albacore, yellowfin and bigeye tunas, and striped marlin, the current agreed biomass 
limit reference point is 20% SBF=0 based on recruitment conditions for the most recent 10 years 
of assessment (excluding the final year of assessment when recruitment is poorly estimated). 
The Commission has also since decided not to adopt an equivalent F-based reference point, as 
this was seen as redundant given the adoption of a biomass-based LRP. 
The continued failure of current CMMs to address the issue of increasing capacity and declining 
stocks adds urgency to the need to adopt TRPs and harvest control rules. These TRPs must 
ensure, at a minimum, a low risk of stocks dropping below the biomass LRPs. The majority of 
CCMs at SC8 recommended that the ‘low risk’ level for stocks dropping above these LRPs 
should be 10% for yellowfin and bigeye, and 5% for albacore and skipjack. 
However, in some cases, such as in considering the economic viability of the Pacific Island 
albacore fleets, a higher TRP is indicated. For example, two papers presented at SC10 showed 
that for south Pacific albacore:  
• 
There is a 5% risk of LRP being breached if the goal is to maintain the stock at 59% SBF=0 
and 10% risk if the stock is maintained at 55% SBF=0. Both these levels are below the 
current level (63% SBF=0) where some south Pacific longline fleets are already struggling 
to make a living.3  
• 
The biomass of albacore that will provide the MEY for albacore is estimated to be much 
higher that the level required to maintain the MEY.4 
For these reasons, Greenpeace is urging the Commission to:   
Adopt interim target reference points (TRPs) of 50% SBF=0 for skipjack, bigeye and 
yellowfin, and 70% SBF=0 for albacore until final TRPs are agreed by the Commission no 
later than 2017. Greenpeace supports the FFA proposed replacement for the conservation 
and management measure on establishing a harvest strategy for key tuna species in the 
Western and Central Pacific Ocean. 
 
 
                                                             
3  Pilling GM, Harley SJ, Hampton J (2014). Evaluation of risks of exceeding limit reference points for south Pacific 
albacore, bigeye, yellowfin and skipjack tunas with implications for target reference points: A case study using south 
Pacific albacore. WCPFC-SC10-2014/MI-WP-01. https://wcpfc.int/node/18513 
4  Berger A, Reid C, Pilling G, Imo R (2014). Potential target reference points that consider profitability of fleets: South 
Pacific albacore longlining as an example. WCPFC-SC10-2014/MI-WP-04. https://wcpfc.int/node/18516 
 
4 
4. Tropical tunas 
 
The dire state of bigeye tuna indicated by the 2014 stock assessment, now depleted to 16% 
SBF=0, demands immediate and resolute action from CMMs to address the numerous 
weaknesses of tropical tuna measures adopted to date. Both longline and purse seine fleets 
must share the responsibility for the demise of the bigeye stock, and reduce their impacts on 
bigeye tuna in particular. 
 
For purse seine vessels, data has clearly shown that the FAD ban period that has been 
progressively introduced since 2009 provides the only respite for bigeye tuna throughout the 
year. Proposed rules such as extending the FAD ban period, banning night setting and capping 
annual FAD use will go some way to limit FAD impacts. However, the dire state of bigeye tuna 
and the disproportionate impact of purse seine FAD sets on juvenile bigeye – not to mention the 
bycatch of threatened species – means that there is simply no justification for allowing the 
continued use of FADs in purse seine fisheries at all. A year-round ban on FADs is long 
overdue, and must be adopted as part of the revised CMM on tropical tunas. 
 
Longline fisheries stand the most to gain from reversing the decline of bigeye tuna and 
recovering stocks to a healthy level. Longline fishing nations must fully cooperate in this 
recovery, starting with providing operational level data from their fleets and agreeing to catch 
reductions. Those CCMs that fail to comply with either data provision or catch limits should face 
serious penalties, including the compounding catch limit deductions proposed by the FFA. 
Transhipments at sea represent a fundamental loophole allowing IUU fleets to operate. 
Existing prohibitions to transhipment at sea by purse seiners must be expanded to include 
all longline fleets. Greenpeace also calls for the closure of the Pacific Commons (high seas 
pockets) to all fishing, both longline and purse seine. 
 
 
5. South Pacific albacore 
Agreeing a comprehensive CMM for South Pacific albacore is of absolute urgency for the 
Commission. Even with the stock at 63% BF=0 (range 35-80%), the fishery is becoming 
unprofitable – particularly for local fleets of Small Island Developing States (SIDs). A TRP is 
urgently needed for albacore, and must be set at well above the economically and biologically 
risky MSY level. Greenpeace is therefore recommending that the Commission adopts an interim 
TRP for albacore of 70% SBF=0.. 
 
The existing CMM 2010-05 only limits the number of flagged fishing vessels actively fishing for 
South Pacific albacore in the Convention area south of 20°S. There are no limits on albacore 
catches on the high seas between the equator and 20°S, and major increases in efficiency and 
the number of set hooks means that the purpose of the limit on vessel capacity south of 20°S is 
severely compromised. 
 
We also recognise the motivation by SIDs to develop their own fisheries for South Pacific 
albacore in line with their development aspiration stipulated under the Convention and in CMM 
2013-06.  
 
Greenpeace calls on CCMs to adopt a Conservation and Management Measure for South Pacific 
albacore which sets the basis for a reduction of fishing capacity in the fishery and puts catches 
in line with precautionary catch levels and to enable stock recovery to a TRP of 70% SBF=0. 
Greenpeace believes such measure could build on the FFA proposal and must ensure that both 
fishing capacity and catches be brought down to sustainable levels. Greenpeace recommends 
that decreased fishing opportunities are allocated in particular to CCMs that are not complying 
 
5 
with data provision requirements. 
 
 
6. Sharks 
Recent studies from the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) have confirmed the common 
use of fishing practices that deliberately increase sharks catches. This essentially involves the 
use of ‘shark lines’ – branch lines that are directly attached directly to the floats (rather than the 
mainline), with wire traces used to prevents sharks from biting free when hooked, and bait that 
attracts sharks. Two of the most commonly caught shark species, oceanic whitetip sharks and 
silky sharks, are targeted in this manner. Recent assessments show that these species are in a 
very poor state, with fishing rates well in excess of the FMSY and with stock declines to well below 
SBMSY.5 6 7  
 
In has been known for some time that Pacific blue sharks have been targeted by some longline 
fleets. There is no assessment for South Pacific blue shark, and while a recent assessment of the 
North Pacific stock suggests that the stock may be not be overfished, the Science Committee 
expressed concerns that the catch data is poor and there is considerable uncertainty in the 
assessment.8 Therefore, this species should not be targeted until such time as data has 
improved and assessments show that the stocks are healthy.   
 
Countries can no longer use the excuse that sharks are unfortunate victims of bycatch and must 
put strong measures in place to prevent sharks from being targeted – gear modifications that 
target sharks must be banned. 
 
While the greatest impact on silky and oceanic whitetip shark stocks is attributed to bycatch 
from the longline fishery, the associated purse seine fishery also has a significant impact. The 
fishing mortality on silky sharks from the associated purse seine fishery alone is above FMSY and 
these sets catch predominantly juveniles. Furthermore, recent research in the Indian Ocean 
showed that there are hidden impacts on silky sharks that have not been considered in stock 
assessments. Silky sharks are entangled and killed in the netting and lines that typically hang 
below FADs in numbers that may be as much as 5–10 times higher than the known bycatch.  It is 
highly likely that significant mortality from FAD entanglement also occurs in the Pacific Ocean. 
 
Given the importance of sharks in the Pacific ecosystem, and the continuing poor availability of 
data, the WCPFC must agree a replacement CMM for sharks that focuses on reducing the catch 
of sharks. Greenpeace urges the adoption of the following rules within a strengthened CMM: 
 
• 
A ban on the use of sharks lines, wire traces and shark bait on longlines. 
• 
A total ban on the use of FADs in association with purse seine fishing in order to help 
address bycatch of silky sharks and oceanic whitetip sharks. 
• 
The prompt and careful release of any captured silky sharks, oceanic whitetip sharks and 
blue sharks. 
• 
A total prohibition of the retention, transhipment, storage, on-board sale and landing of 
silky sharks, oceanic whitetip sharks and blue sharks until such time that stock 
                                                             
5 
Rice J, Harley S (2012). Stock assessment of oceanic whitetip sharks in the western and central Pacific Ocean. 
WCPFC-SC8-2012/SA-WP-06. https://wcpfc.int/node/3235  
6 
Rice J, Harley S (2012). Stock assessment of silky sharks in the western and central Pacific Ocean. Eighth WCPFC-
SC8-2012/SA-WP-07. https://wcpfc.int/node/3236  
7 
Rice J, Harley S (2013). Updated Stock assessment of silky shark in the western and central Pacific Ocean. 
WCPFC-SC9-2013/SA-WP-03. https://wcpfc.int/node/3685  
8  WCPFC	  (2014).	  Summary	  Report.	  Scientific	  Committee	  Tenth	  Regular	  Session,	  6–14	  Aug	  2013,	  Majuro,	  Republic	  of	  
the	  Marshall	  Islands.	  https://www.wcpfc.int/node/19472 
 
6 
assessments are of sufficient quality to demonstrate healthy stock levels (>BMSY or 
equivalent). 
• 
The urgent improvement to the quality and quantity of data recorded and reported for all 
shark catches, including animal condition on release (dead, injured, alive). 
• 
The further development of reference points, best practice bycatch mitigation measures, 
and management goals for all non-target species, especially sharks. 
• 
Strengthening the current shark finning measure from the 5% fin-to-carcass ratio 
requirement to a requirement to land all sharks with fins naturally attached. This will 
enable better data collection and enforcement of prohibitions on the retention of at-risk 
species, and is the approach recommended by the Memorandum of Understanding on 
the Conservation of Migratory Sharks.   
