1 
 
 
 
COMMISSION 
FIFTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA 
10 – 14 December 2018 
POSITION STATEMENT FOR WCPFC15 
WCPFC15-2018-OP09 
5 December 2018 
 
Submission by International Pole and Line Foundation (IPNLF)  
 
 
 
 
 
International Pole & Line Foundation 
1 London Street, Reading, RG1 4QW, United states 
Registered charity no. 1145586 
info@ipnlf.org     www.ipnlf.org  
 
 
 
IPNLF POSITION STATEMENT 
 
15th Regular Session of the  
Western & Central Pacific Fisheries Commission 
Honolulu, Hawaii, 10-14 December 2018 
 
 
 
Proud handline fishers show their catch of the day, Indonesia © IPNLF 
The International Pole & Line Foundation (IPNLF) is an international non-profit working to develop and 
demonstrate the value of one-by-one tuna fisheries. We work across science, policy and the seafood sector 
to improve the wellbeing of coastal communities that are committed to environmentally and socially 
responsible tuna fishing methods, such as pole-and-line, troll, and handline. The Western and Central Pacific 
has strong historical linkages to such fisheries, and many continue to play important roles in Indonesia, 
Japan, New Zealand, the Solomon Islands, Tahiti, the Philippines and Vietnam, among others. 
 
The Western and Central Pacific Ocean is home to the world’s largest tuna fishery, two of the world’s largest 
pole-and-line fisheries, and many troll and handline fisheries supporting coastal communities throughout 
the region. IPNLF would like to see management measures adopted that safeguard tuna stocks and 
ecosystems so that one-by-one tuna fisheries, and the communities that depend on them, can flourish.  
 
 
 
 
 
International Pole & Line Foundation 
1 London Street, Reading, RG1 4QW, United states 
Registered charity no. 1145586 
info@ipnlf.org     www.ipnlf.org  
 
 
 
 
At this year’s Commission meeting, IPNLF encourages members, cooperating non-members and 
participating territories (CCMs collectively) to adopt a number of conservation and management measures 
(CMMs) that, together, will strengthen the framework for sustainable tuna fisheries in the Western and 
Central Pacific Ocean. Specifically, we urge progress in the following areas: 
 
• 
Continue progress of harvest strategies for all major tuna stocks to avoid adverse impacts on 
the stocks while also recognizing the social and economic dependence of coastal communities 
on the fisheries. To this end, we encourage the adoption of an interim target reference point 
for south Pacific albacore and the establishment of a Science-Management Dialogue.  
• 
Strengthen the management of tropical tunas, in line with the advice from the Scientific 
Committee (SC), to avoid overfishing in the future and ensure the continued opportunities for 
one-by-one fisheries (e.g. pole and line, handline and troll), coastal fisheries and communities 
in line with the UN Fish Stock Agreement and the Sustainable Development Goals. 
• 
Improve the monitoring and regulation of fish aggregating devices (FADs) and purse seine 
supply vessels to better understand the impacts on fishing efficiency and inform future 
management. This should include: establishing comprehensive systems to accurately quantify 
numbers of FADs and active buoys, establishing wide-scale collection of individual FAD 
deployment, tracking, and set-history data, and ensuring access to FAD data for scientists and 
managers. 
• 
Reduce marine pollution, including plastics and FADs which wash ashore and damage coastal 
habitats by requiring fully biodegradable materials in drifting FAD construction. Also, ensure 
that FAD owners recover drifting FADs while at sea, prior to beaching events, and use available 
information to inform mitigation initiatives.   
• 
Adopt measures that will effectively reduce bycatch and protect endangered, threatened, or 
protected species, including sharks, seabirds, cetaceans, and sea turtles. A comprehensive 
shark measure, as recommended by the SC, should be adopted this year. Additionally, requiring 
non-entangling FADs will greatly reduce impacts of ghost fishing on sharks and sea turtles.  
• 
Improve Monitoring, Control, and Surveillance in relation to longline fishing activities to 
reduce illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing through enhanced observer coverage 
(including through electronic monitoring systems) and strengthening at-sea transhipment 
measures.  
 
There are several proposals on the table for this year’s Regular Session which will advance these key issues, 
and we hope common ground can be found. Progress across all of these areas is needed, as more 
sustainable management frameworks will benefit every CCM, bring positive long-term returns to fishing 
communities, and minimise the risk of future fisheries collapse. We look forward to working with delegates 
as well as with our Members to strive for the highest standards of sustainability and equity in fisheries 
management to reinforce the good work of the Commission. 
 
 
 
 
International Pole & Line Foundation 
1 London Street, Reading, RG1 4QW, United states 
Registered charity no. 1145586 
info@ipnlf.org     www.ipnlf.org  
 
 
 
One-by-one fishers fly the IPNLF flag, Sorong, Indonesia © IPNLF 
  
ABOUT IPNLF 
The International Pole & Line Foundation (IPNLF) works to develop, support and promote socially and 
environmentally responsible one-by-one tuna fisheries around the world. IPNLF’s ambition is to contribute 
to thriving coastal fisheries, including the people, communities, businesses and seas connected with 
them.  As a hub for sustainably-minded organisations, we use the influence of the market to forge change 
through practical fishery projects and stakeholder cooperation. IPNLF membership is open to organisations 
involved in the one-by-one tuna supply chain. Allied with our Members, IPNLF demonstrates the value of 
one-by-one caught tuna to consumers, policymakers and throughout the supply chain.  
 
IPNLF was officially registered in the United Kingdom in 2012 (Charity 1145586), with branch offices in 
London and the Maldives, and a staff presence in Indonesia, USA, Netherlands, France and South Africa. 
 
Contact: Adam Baske, IPNLF Director, Policy and Outreach, adam.baske@ipnlf.org 
 
Keep informed about the latest developments in one-by-one tuna fisheries through our website and by 
connecting with us on Facebook, Twitter and LinkedIn. 
 
