 
 
COMMISSION 
THIRTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Denarau Island, Fiji 
5 – 9 December, 2016 
LETTER ON PACIFIC BLUEFIN TUNA (PBF) 
WCPFC13-2016-OP12 
3 December 2016 
 
 
Paper submitted by IUCN 
 
Ms. Rhea Moss-Christian 
WCPFC Chair 
PO Box 2356 
Kolonia, Pohnpei State, 96941 
Federated States of Micronesia 
 
Mr. Guillermo Morán 
IATTC Chair & Ministerio de Agricultura, Ganadería, Acuacultura y Pesca  
3 y Calle 12 
Manta, Manabi, Ecuador 
 
29 November 2016 
Dear Ms. Moss-Christian and Mr. Morán: 
Pacific bluefin tuna (PBF) have the unfortunate distinction of being the world’s most depleted tuna 
population in history, and the species now faces a serious threat of extinction.i Decades of overfishing 
have decimated the stock, pushing it down to just 2.6% of its unfished level.ii Despite the clear scientific 
evidence that the species is in a dire situation, both domestic and international fisheries managers are 
failing to protect Pacific bluefin tuna. We, the undersigned 58 scientists, call for a moratorium on 
commercial Pacific bluefin fishing until the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) 
and Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC) improve their management of the species by 
ending overfishing and adopting a basin-wide rebuilding plan with a science-based, precautionary 
rebuilding target and deadline. 
We join a growing number of experts who have recognized the serious situation that PBF is in due to a 
lack of effective management. In June 2016, an independent performance review of IATTC stated:  “By 
any measure, this stock is in serious trouble…Pacific Bluefin has been fished to a very low level and 
needs urgent joint WCPFC and IATTC management action.”iii Fourteen organizations recently submitted 
a petition to the U.S. government to list the Pacific bluefin tuna as endangered under the Endangered 
Species Act, citing its severely overfished state, continuing overfishing, and the very real risk of 
extinction. The U.S. government has determined that listing may be warranted and is now conducting a 
full status review of the species. In Japan, a group of artisanal fishermen who target PBF have voluntarily 
suspended fishing during the summer spawning seasoniv. Unfortunately, other governments have not 
followed these leads. WCPFC took no additional action at its 2015 meeting, and IATTC took no additional 
action at its 2016 meetings, despite the known crisis facing PBT. 
Until very recently, there was no international management of this highly migratory stock whose 
migrations of thousands of miles take it through the waters of many fishing nations. In 2014, WCPFC 
adopted a rebuilding target of the “historical” median biomass. However, because the stock had been 
overfished for almost the entire period they defined as “historical,” the target equates to just 6.4% of 
the unfished level.v This is well below the commonly recommended rebuilding target of 20%-40% of 
unfished levels and is utterly inadequate to return the population to healthy levels.vi As part of this 
insufficient rebuilding plan, WCPFC adopted a 50% reduction in the catch limits for small PBF; however, 
loopholes in the measure allowed several countries to increase their catch.vii Furthermore, neither 
Commission has adopted target or limit reference points. 
The lack of effective management measures means that high levels of fishing continue to put pressure 
on the severely depleted population, with fishing rates up to three times higher than sustainable 
levels.viii Nearly 98% of Pacific-wide catch is composed of juveniles that have not yet reproduced, a 
blatant case of growth overfishing.ix At the other end of the lifecycle, adults are targeted by an industrial 
purse seine fleet when they are aggregated on the spawning grounds, an ill-advised practice that 
reduces reproductive success by disturbing spawning and selectively removing large spawning adults, 
leading to reduced maximum yield and loss of genetic diversity.x   
Adding to the management failures, there continues to be a lack of transparency in the scientific process 
that is out of step with standard practices in international fisheries science. The first publically available 
stock assessment report was not released by the overseeing scientific body, the International Scientific 
Committee for Tuna and Tuna-Like Species in the North Pacific Ocean (ISC), until 2012. The ISC still does 
not allow independent observers to attend or participate in their stock assessment meetings, and non-
government scientists must be invited in order to attend, where their participation is severely limited. 
Meeting reports can take six months or longer to be approved and released to the public, often delaying 
needed action. 
As scientists who are concerned about the dire state of the Pacific bluefin population, we urge PBF 
fishing nations to immediately implement a moratorium on commercial PBF fishing until appropriate, 
science-based management measures and a basin-wide rebuilding plan with an appropriately 
precautionary target are in place. We also call for full transparency in the scientific process, including 
opening ISC working group meetings to observers and making meeting documents publicly available in a 
timely fashion. Decisive action is now critical.  
Sincerely, 
Octavio Aburto-Oropeza, Ph.D. 
Associate Professor of Marine Biology, Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
 
Larry G. Allen, Ph.D. 
Chair and Professor of Biology, California State University 
  
Rebecca G. Asch, Ph.D. 
Research Fellow, University of Texas Marine Science Institute 
Assistant Professor, East Carolina University  
 
Jonathan Baskin, Ph.D. 
Emeritus Professor of Biological Sciences, California State Polytechnic University Pomona 
 
Giacomo Bernardi, Ph.D.  
Professor of Biology, University of California Santa Cruz 
 
Marcel Bigue 
Marine Program Director, WildAid 
 
Dee Boersma, Ph.D.  
Wadsworth Endowed Chair in Conservation Science, Department of Biology, University of Washington  
 
Meryl Camhi, Ph.D. 
Director, NY Seascape, Wildlife Conservation Society 
 
Barry Chernoff, Ph.D. 
Professor and Director of College of the Environment, Wesleyan University 
 
Timothy D. Clark, Ph.D. 
Associate Professor, Climate Change Biology of Fishes, University of Tasmania & CSIRO Agriculture and 
Food 
 
Bruce Collette, Ph.D. 
Chair, IUCN SSC Tuna & Billfish Specialist Group 
Senior Scientist, National Marine Fisheries Service Systematics Laboratory 
Senior Scientist, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution 
 
Lawrence M. Dill, Ph.D.  
Professor Emeritus, Simon Fraser University 
 
Catherine Dorey, Ph.D. 
Science Adviser & Campaigner – Tuna Project, Greenpeace 
 
Sylvia Earle, Ph.D. 
Founder, Mission Blue and SEAlliance 
Explorer-in-Residence, National Geographic Society 
Former Chief Scientist, NOAA 
 
Sue C. Ebanks, Ph.D. 
Assistant Professor, College of Sciences and Technology, Marine & Environmental Sciences Department, 
Savannah State University 
 
Gail Fraser, Ph.D. 
Associate Professor, Faculty of Environmental Studies, York University  
 
Susanna Fuller, Ph.D. 
Marine Conservation Coordinator, Ecology Action Centre 
 
Grantly R. Galland, Ph.D. 
Senior Associate for Tuna Conservation, The Pew Charitable Trusts 
 
Gwen D. Goodmanlowe, Ph.D.       
Lecturer, Department of Biological Sciences, California State University, Long Beach 
 
John Graves, Ph.D. 
Professor and Chair, Department of Fisheries Science, Virginia Institute of Marine Science 
 
Brock Grill, Ph.D. 
Associate Professor, Department of Neuroscience, The Scripps Research Institute, Florida 
 
Gary D. Grossman, Ph.D. 
Fellow, American Fisheries Society 
Professor of Animal Ecology, University of Georgia 
 
Quentin Hanich, Ph.D. 
Associate Professor and Fisheries Governance Program Leader, University of Wollongong 
 
Aaron Hartmann, Ph.D. 
Research Fellow, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution 
 
Guy Harvey, Ph.D. 
Artist 
Founder and President, Guy Harvey Research Institute 
Founder and President, Guy Harvey Ocean Foundation 
 
Philip A. Hastings, Ph.D. 
Professor and Curator of Marine Vertebrates, Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
  
Gene Helfman, Ph.D. 
Professor Emeritus, Odum School of Ecology, University of Georgia 
 
Mike Hirshfield, Ph.D. 
Chief Scientist and Strategy Officer, Oceana 
 
Peter Hodum, Ph.D. 
Associate Professor, Biology Department, University of Puget Sound 
 
Alexis Jackson, Ph.D. 
Senior Associate, The Pew Charitable Trusts 
 
Stephen C. Kempf, Ph.D. 
Associate Professor (retired), Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University 
 
Susan Lieberman, Ph.D. 
Vice President, International Policy, Wildlife Conservation Society 
 
Karen R. Lips, Ph.D. 
Professor and Director of Graduate Programs in Sustainable Development and Conservation Biology, 
University of Maryland 
 
Kathryn Matthews, Ph.D. 
Deputy Chief Scientist, Oceana 
Frank H. McCormick, Ph.D. 
Chair, American Society of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists Conservation Committee 
 
Brian Gregory Mitchell, Ph.D. 
Research Biologist, Senior Lecturer Biological Oceanography UC San Diego, Scripps Institution of 
Oceanography 
 
John A. Musick, Ph.D. 
Professor Emeritus, Virginia Institute of Marine Science 
 
Wallace J. Nichols, Ph.D. 
Research Associate, California Academy of Sciences 
 
Daniel Pauly, Ph.D. 
Professor, Institute for the Oceans and Fisheries, University of British Columbia 
 
Hudson Pinheiro, Ph.D. 
Postdoctoral Researcher, California Academy of Sciences 
 
Beth Polidoro, Ph.D.  
Assistant Professor, Arizona State University 
Associate Director of Research, Center for Biodiversity Outcomes 
Senior Sustainability Scientist, Global Institute of Sustainability 
Co-Chair IUCN Marine Fishes Red List Authority, IUCN Species Survival Commission 
 
Gemma Quilez-Badia, Ph.D.  
Bluefin tuna scientist, Barcelona, Spain 
 
Angela Quiros, Ph.D. 
Postdoctoral Researcher, University of California, Santa Cruz 
 
George Rabb, Ph.D. 
President Emeritus, Chicago Zoological Society 
Former Chair, International Union for Conservation of Nature Species Survival Commission 
 
Carl Safina, Ph.D. 
Founding President, The Safina Center 
Professor, Stony Brook University 
 
Yasuhiro Sanada, Ph.D. 
Visiting Assistant Professor, Waseda University  
Visiting Researcher, Hosei University 
 
Alan H. Savitzky, Ph.D. 
Professor and Head of Biology, Utah State University 
   
 
H. Bradley Shaffer, Ph.D. 
Distinguished Professor and Director of La Kretz Center for California Conservation Science,  
University of California Los Angeles 
 
Geoff Shester, Ph.D. 
California Campaign Director, Oceana 
 
Norman Stacey, Ph.D. 
Professor Emeritus, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta 
 
Kimberly Tenggardjaja, Ph.D. 
Environmental Scientist, State Water Resources Control Board (California) 
 
Nicole Thometz, Ph.D. 
Postdoctoral Researcher, University of California, Santa Cruz 
 
Scott Veirs, Ph.D.  
President, Beam Reach Marine Science and Sustainability School 
 
Enriqueta Velarde, Ph.D. 
Researcher, Instituto de Ciencias Marinas y Pesquerías, Universidad Veracruzana 
 
H.J. Walker, Jr. 
Senior Museum Scientist, Marine Vertebrates Collection, Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
 
Judith S. Weis, Ph.D. 
Professor Emerita, Department of Biological Sciences, Rutgers University 
 
Boris Worm, Ph.D. 
Professor, Department of Biology, Dalhousie University 
 
Mary Lou Zoback, Ph.D. 
Consulting Professor, Department of Geophysics, Stanford University 
 
*** Individuals have signed in their personal capacity and do not necessarily reflect their affiliation’s viewpoints. 
 
 
                                                           
i IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. http://www.iucnredlist.org/details/170341/0 
ii ISC PBFWG. 2016. 2016 Pacific bluefin tuna stock assessment, Draft Executive Summary. 
http://www.iattc.org/Meetings/Meetings2016/SAC7/PDFfiles/INF/SAC-07-INF-C(a)-ISC-Letter-IATTC-Executive-Summary.pdf.  
iii Moss Adams LLP. 2016. Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission and Agreement on the International Dolphin Conservation 
Program Performance Review. http://www.iattc.org/Meetings/Meetings2016/June/pdf-files/IATTC-AIDCP-Performance-
Review-Final-ReportENG.pdf.  
iv Bird, Winifred. 2016. In Japan, a David vs Goliath Battle to Preserve Bluefin Tuna 
http://e360.yale.edu/feature/in_japan_a_david_versus_goliath_battle_to_preserve_bluefin_tuna/2950/ 
v ISC PBFWG. 2016. 2016 Pacific bluefin tuna stock assessment, Draft Executive Summary. 
http://www.iattc.org/Meetings/Meetings2016/SAC7/PDFfiles/INF/SAC-07-INF-C(a)-ISC-Letter-IATTC-Executive-Summary.pdf. 
vi Restrepo, V. R., Thompson, G. G., Mace, P.M., Gabriel, W. L., Low, L. L., MacCall, A. D., Methot, R. D., Powers, J. E., Taylor, B. 
L., Wade, P. R., and Witzig, J. F. 1998. Technical guidance on the use of precautionary approaches to implementing National 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Standard 1 of the Magnuson– Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act. National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (US) Technical Memorandum NMFS-F/SPO-31. 54 pp. 
vii Sanada Y. 2015. A repeated story of the tragedy of the commons: a short survey on the Pacific bluefin tuna fisheries and 
farming in Japan. 160 pp. 
viii Fishing mortality in 2011 through 2013 was estimated to be 294% of the F40% level. ISC PBFWG. 2016. 2016 Pacific bluefin 
tuna stock assessment, Draft Executive Summary. http://www.iattc.org/Meetings/Meetings2016/SAC7/PDFfiles/INF/SAC-07-
INF-C(a)-ISC-Letter-IATTC-Executive-Summary.pdf. 
ix ISC PBFWG. 2014. Stock assessment of bluefin tuna in the Pacific Ocean in 2014. 
http://isc.fra.go.jp/pdf/2014_Intercessional/Annex4_Pacific%20Bluefin%20Assmt%20Report%202014-%20June1-Final-
Posting.pdf. 
x Van Overzee HMJ, AD Rijnsdorp. 2015. Effects of fishing during the spawning period: implications for sustainable 
management. Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries 25:65-83. 
