 
 
COMMISSION 
THIRTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Denarau Island, Fiji 
5 – 9 December, 2016 
VIEWS ON PROPOSED INTERIM TARGET AND LIMIT REFERENCE  
WCPFC13-2016-OP13 
3 December 2016 
 
 
Paper submitted by Sustainable Fisheries Partnership Foundation 
 
 
Attention: Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission - 
Secretariat (as an information document for the forthcoming 
Commission meeting) 
 
Dear Sir/Madam 
 
Proposal for the adoption by WCPFC of interim target and limit 
reference points for all target tuna stocks and key by-catch species 
where these are not currently in place 
 
We would like to take this opportunity to welcome the convening of 
the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) in 
December and to wish success to this body in achieving the 
sustainable management of the fisheries within its jurisdiction.  
 
We note that there have been efforts in the past to promote measures 
that will facilitate sustainable management of tuna and that there is 
considerable interest in the creation and implementation of harvest 
strategies for tuna species. We also note that the creation of such 
strategies is a complex undertaking, involving the definition of 
objectives, target and limit reference points (and the acceptable risks 
of breaching them), a monitoring strategy, harvest control rules and 
other elements. It is inevitable that such an undertaking will be time-
consuming and this delay allows unsustainable fishing to continue – 
an undesirable situation which members of the WCPFC may consider 
frustrating. 
 
We also note that the United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement1 requires 
regional fishery management organisations such as the WCPFC, in the 
absence of appropriate data, to implement precautionary measures to 
avoid the overfishing of target stocks, the unacceptable depletion of 
by-catch species or damage to the wider ecosystem. It is our 
                                                        
1 Agreement for the implementation of the provisions of the United Nations Convention 
on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the conservation and 
management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks. Annex II 
Guidelines for the application of precautionary reference points in conservation and 
management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks. 
understanding that member nations of the WCPFC are signatories to 
this agreement. 
 
We therefore wish to recommend a strategy that will meet the desire 
to create effective harvest strategies for tuna in a timely manner while 
also meeting the requirements of the UN Fish Stocks Agreement. 
Specifically, we would like to suggest that the WCPFC adopts a set of 
interim target and limit reference points for all target tuna stocks and 
key by-catch species where these are not currently in place. These 
interim targets should be in place within the next 12 months. 
 
The value in this approach is that it provides management to the 
relevant fisheries but does not interfere with existing work plans to 
create species-specific reference points. The development of all the 
required elements of the comprehensive harvest strategies would 
continue in parallel with the interim targets. As each species-specific 
reference point was completed it would replace the interim target and 
limit reference points.  
 
We suggest that the selection of appropriate interim reference points 
be based on existing reference points for the same or similar species in 
either Regional Fishery Management Organisation (RFMO) or 
exclusive economic zone (EEZ) management regimes around the 
world. We note that such interim reference points may need to be 
made somewhat more precautionary than species-specific reference 
points. 
 
This approach will offer considerable assistance to the ambitions of 
the WCPFC. It allows for a faster introduction of appropriate 
management to these important fisheries through the use of interim 
reference points while simultaneously supporting the development of 
permanent strategies and enhancing the credibility of the WCPFC as 
an institution that can deliver significant results over a meaningful 
timescale. 
 
We respectfully ask that you consider this recommendation in the 
course of your deliberations in December. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
Blake Lee-Harwood, Strategy Director, Sustainable Fisheries 
Partnership, for and on behalf of: 
  
Giant Eagle 
 
 
 
 
Publix Super Markets, Inc.  
Rich Castle 
 
 
 
 
Michael Hewett 
 
Morrisons  
 
 
 
 
Albertsons 
n/a  
 
 
 
 
 
Buster Houston 
 
Wegmans  
 
 
 
 
ALDI SOUTH Group  
Carl Salamone  
 
 
 
Sabine Müller 
 
Target 
 
 
 
 
 
Frinsa 
Lisa Boyd  
 
 
 
 
Jose Aller Fernandez 
 
Chefs Trading  
 
 
 
Sea Delight 
Chris Wirges 
 
 
 
 
Adriana Sánchez-Lindsay 
 
NORPAC Fisheries Export  
 
Anova Food, LLC 
Charles W. Laidley 
 
 
 
Helen Packer 
 
Culinary Collaborations LLC 
 
Incredible Fish 
Michael McNicholas  
 
 
Tim Lycke 
 
Lotus Seafood Inc. 
 
 
 
Gallant Inc. 
 
Nick Ovchinnikov 
 
 
 
Nick Sakagami 
 
Orca Bay Seafoods 
 
 
 
Raw Seafoods Inc. 
Ryan Mackey 
 
 
 
 
Tom Vasile 
 
North Atlantic Seafood 
 
 
Beaver Street Fisheries  
Greg Lavoie  
 
 
 
 
Casey R. Marion 
 
D&E Imports 
 
 
 
 
Boston Sword and Tuna 
Dean Holzer 
 
 
 
 
Michael Scola 
 
New England Seafood International 
Seafood Imports, Inc. 
James Robinson  
 
 
 
Michael Berkowitz 
 
OPAGAC  
 
 
 
 
Fortune Fish & Gourmet 
Julio Morón 
 
 
 
 
Sean O’Scannlain 
