1 
 
 
COMMISSION 
 ELEVENTH REGULAR SESSION  
Faleata Sports Complex, Apia, SAMOA  
1 - 5 December 2014 
IGFA POSITION STATEMENT  
WCPFC11-2014-OP15 
26 November 2014 
 
Paper by International Game Fish Association (IGFA) 
 
  
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Game Fish Association 
Fishing Hall of Fame & Museum 
300 Gulf Stream Way, Dania Beach, Florida, 33004 U.S.A. 
Phone:  (954) 927-2628    Fax: (954) 924-4299  Museum Fax (954) 924-4220 
 
 
Recommendations to the 11th Regular Session of the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission 
 
The International Game Fish Association (IGFA) is a non-profit organization that represents recreational anglers 
throughout the world. IGFA was established in 1939, has active members in over 100 countries, is the 
governing body for international recreational fishing, and provides rules for ethical angling practices. Many of 
IGFA’s members target the highly migratory species managed by WCPFC, especially marlin, sailfish and 
spearfish (i.e., billfish) which are primarily caught and released.  
 
IGFA has great concern about how highly migratory species are being managed on a global level for 
recreational anglers. The lack of data and accurate reporting on billfish catch is of particular concern. As an 
organization that is committed to the conservation of game fishes, IGFA has deployed 162 pop-up satellite 
archival tags in marlin around the world in the past three years, many of which have been in waters under this 
organization’s purview. The information gained from this exercise is available to your scientific committee.   
 
 
Billfish 
 
Although primarily a commercial bycatch species, billfish are highly sought after recreational species 
that are primarily caught and released.  We urge the WCPFC to set a target reference rate above BMSY 
for recreational anglers. 
 
The WCNPO stock of striped marlin is overfished and experiencing overfishing. Reducing fishing 
mortality would likely increase spawning stock biomass and may improve the chances of higher 
recruitment. We recommend fishing at a constant catch of 2,500 mt that would lead to potential 
increases in spawning biomass of 133% to 223% by 2017. 
 
Although not currently overfished or experiencing overfishing, we recommend that fishing mortality 
not be increased for blue marlin so that the stock can rebound to levels in excess of BMSY.   
 
No formal stock assessments exist for sailfish and black marlin.  Better data collection is necessary for 
these species so that their true abundance can be accurately estimated.  
 
IGFA further recommends implementing a prohibition on Pacific billfish entering into international 
trade. Similar legislation has recently been passed, at the request of IGFA, in the United States that 
now bans importation of marlin, sailfish and spearfish into the continental United States.  
 
We also recommend all countries be required to report dead discards and use circle hooks in their 
longline fisheries.  
 
Tuna 
 
The 2014 stock assessment update indicates that Pacific Bluefin tuna have been reduced to only 4% of 
their virgin biomass.  Yet, at the 2014 meeting, the WCPFC Northern Committee agreed to only a 10-
year rebuilding target of less than 7% of historic biomass.  These actions are insufficient to address the 
status of Pacific bluefin tuna and will result in the stock remaining in a severely depleted condition for 
at least another decade.   The WCPFC should direct the Northern Committee to establish a target that 
has a reasonable likelihood of rebuilding the stock.  The WCPFC should also work closely with the Inter-
American Tropical Tuna Commission to enact Pacific-wide management measures that would restore 
Pacific bluefin abundance to at least 25% of its historic biomass within 10 years. 
 
 The International Game Fish Association is a not-for-profit organization committed to the conservation of game fish and the 
promotion of responsible, ethical angling practices through science, education, rule making and record keeping.  
Email:  HQ@igfa.org   Website: www.igfa.org 
 
Page 2 
 
 
 
According to the 2014 stock assessment, the bigeye tuna stock has been depleted by 84%.  Excessive 
harvest of juvenile fish around FADs by purse seine gear continues to be problematic, as temporary FAD 
closures have proved largely ineffective.  The IGFA urges the WPFC to enact FAD set limits to reduce 
juvenile bigeye harvest, as well as to implement measures that will reduce bigeye mortality across all 
fishing gears in line with scientific advice. 
 
Pacific skipjack represent the world’s largest tuna fishery, yet no target reference points exist.  IGFA urges 
the WCPFC to adopt a target reference point for this fishery this year and also agree to implement target 
reference points and harvest control rules for all major tuna species. 
 
Sharks 
 
The IGFA urges the WCPFC to develop a dedicated conservation and management measure  for sharks 
that bans wire traces on all longlines and utilizes precautionary scientific advice to manage them 
sustainably. 
 
IUU 
 
IGFA recommends that WPCFC strengthen the controls against illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) 
fishing.   Specifically, we urge the commission to establish a procedure that allows IUU vessels to be listed 
and removed throughout the year so that a comprehensive list of IUU vessels can be maintained.   
 
Transhipment at sea facilitates IUU fishing and the IGFA recommends that the WCPFC ban all forms of 
transhipment at sea until it can be demonstrated that such operations are not contributing to IUU fishing. 
 
General 
 
Recreational angling is an established and important economic entity in developed countries and a 
growing one in many developing nations.  As such we wish that WCPFC recognize both its relevance and 
that it may necessitate alternate management objectives than those used in commercial fisheries. IGFA 
kindly offers its consultation to WCPFC on recreational fisheries issues. 
 
 
Managing fisheries on the basis of MSY is an excessively risk-prone approach. As such, we suggest that 
WCPFC adopt a target objective above BMSY to compensate for biological, environmental and data 
uncertainties.   Many recreational fisheries are catch and release in nature, where anglers prefer to catch 
more and bigger fish than to necessarily harvest fish.  In addition to its inherent uncertainty, managing 
stocks on the level of MSY not only reduces the abundance of fish but also their average size. Maintaining 
stocks at higher abundances benefits recreational anglers that release their fish and also contributes to 
the substantial economic value of these fisheries.  We feel this is especially true with bycatch species such 
as marlin and sailfish that have little commercial value but great economic value to recreational anglers.   
 
 
The prevalence and importance of artisanal fisheries within the WCPFC’s purview must be taken into 
consideration.  Better catch data from these fisheries is necessary to evaluate their impact on HMS 
fisheries.  
 
 
 
