1 
 
 
 
COMMISSION 
FIFTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA 
10 – 14 December 2018 
LETTER TO WCPFC ON SUSTAINABILITY OF TUNA STOCKS 
WCPFC15-2018-OP05 
26 November 2018 
 
Submission by International Seafood Sustainability Foundation (ISSF) 
 
 
1 
November 21, 2018 
 
ATTN: Heads of Delegation to IOTC, IATTC, ICCAT and WCPFC 
 
 
Dear Delegates: 
 
This letter is submitted on behalf of the undersigned companies, non-governmental organizations and 
fishing industry associations, all of whom recognize that the sustainability of tuna stocks is integral to 
businesses and livelihoods, as well as to the health of the marine environment. 
 
The companies represent major seafood buyers that source seafood products from a diverse, 
international supply network. 
 
The non-governmental organizations work in more than 100 countries and engage suppliers and provide 
advice to retailers, buyers and food service companies regarding improvements in tuna sustainability. 
 
The fishing industry associations represent a variety of gear types, including purse seine, longline, troll, 
pole and line, and handline vessels active in tuna fisheries worldwide. 
 
Your government serves as an important leader in tuna stock sustainability as a member of one or more 
of the four regional fisheries management organizations (RFMOs) charged with managing the world’s 
tropical tuna fisheries.  We are writing to bring to your attention our collective views on several issues 
crucial to the long-term sustainability of tuna stocks: 
 
• 
The development and implementation of comprehensive, precautionary harvest strategies 
 
• 
Effective monitoring and management of fish aggregating devices (FADs) 
 
• 
Strengthened monitoring, control and surveillance tools, including increased observer 
coverage in purse seine and longline fisheries, and of at-sea transshipment activity through 
human observers and/or electronic monitoring  
 
• 
Greater focus on implementation of bycatch mitigation actions broadly, with an emphasis on 
longline fisheries 
 
We recognize that certain tuna RFMOs have made progress on several of these issues and we applaud 
those actions. 
 
However, we wish to underscore that while the progress to-date is positive, accelerated actions must be 
taken at this year’s RFMO meetings to: 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
1. Develop and implement comprehensive, precautionary harvest strategies with specific timelines 
for all tuna stocks, including the adoption and implementation of target and limit reference 
points, harvest control rules, monitoring strategies, operational objectives, performance 
indicators, and management strategy evaluation; 
 
2. Adopt a 100% observer coverage requirement for purse seine vessels where it is not already 
required, and require the use of the best-available observer safety equipment, communications 
and procedures; 
 
3. Increase compliance with mandatory minimum 5% longline observer coverage rates by 
identifying and sanctioning non-compliance, and adopt and implement a 100% observer 
coverage requirement – human and/or electronic – within five years for longline fisheries; 
 
4. Adopt and implement a 100% observer coverage requirement for at-sea transshipment 
activities, as well as other measures that ensure transshipment activity is transparent and well-
managed, and that all required data is fully collected and sent to the appropriate bodies in a 
timely manner; 
 
5. Develop and implement science-based recommendations for the effective management of 
FADs, and integrate FAD-based information into stock assessments to reduce uncertainties;  
 
6. Adopt effective measures for the use of non-entangling FAD designs as a precautionary measure 
to minimize the entanglement of sharks and other non-target species, and support research on 
biodegradable materials and transition to their use to mitigate marine debris; 
 
7. More effectively implement, and ensure compliance with, existing RFMO bycatch requirements 
and take additional mitigation action, such as improving monitoring at sea, collecting and 
sharing operational-level, species-specific data, and adopting stronger compliance measures, 
including consequences for non-compliance for all gear types. 
 
Collectively, we believe these measures will positively impact the long-term sustainability of tuna stocks 
and the overall health of the marine ecosystem. 
 
We request that your government, as a member of one or more of the tuna RFMOs, take active steps to 
ensure significant progress on these issues at each of the relevant RFMO meetings in 2018, as a matter 
of priority. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Gavin van Der Burgh, CEO 
 
 
 
 
Hugo Byrnes, VP of Product Integrity 
 
 
 
 
 
Anthony Snow, Seafood Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guy Dean, VP/CSO 
 
 
 
 
 
Rayk Mende, Managing Director, ALDI North 
 
 
 
 
Anja Grote Westrick, Director Corporate 
Responsibility International, ALDI South Group 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Natalie Webster, Operations Manager  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
David A. Wiedenfeld, Ph.D,  Sr. Conservation 
Scientist 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Natalie Webster, Co-Founder 
 
 
 
Anertz Muniategi, Managing Director 
 
 
 
  
 
Helen Packer, Science and Sustainability 
Coordinator 
 
 
Janti Djuari, Chairwoman 
 
 
 
 
 
Tod Mackenzie, Senior VP, Corporate 
Communications and Public Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Aloys Guitton, Directeur RSE 
 
 
5 
 
 
Casey R. Marion, Director of Sustainability 
 
 
  
 
Dr Cleo Small, Head of BirdLife International 
Marine Programme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maisie Ganzler, Chief Strategy and Brand 
Officer 
 
 
  
 
 
Jan Tharp, Interim CEO 
  
 
 
 
Mané Calvo García-Benavides, CEO  
 
 
 
 
Vincent BARTHELEMY, Deputy Quality Director, 
Groupe Casino 
 
6 
 
 
 
Anne Whitehead, Responsible Sourcing 
Manager 
 
 
 
 
Chris Wirges, CEO 
 
 
 
 
Kevin Bixler, Global Director, Group Fish 
Procurement 
 
 
 
Catherine Weller, Senior Lawyer, Head of 
Biodiversity Programme 
 
 
Ron Schindler, President  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amy Keister, VP Consumer Engagement 
 
 
 
 
 
Oscar de Miguel, CEO, Conservas Emperatriz  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Jack Kittinger, Senior Director of the Global 
Fisheries and Aquaculture 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
Maura Latini, Direttore generale alla gestione 
 
 
 
 
Anni Mikkelsen, CSR and QA-QC Manager 
 
 
 
 
Sean Cauchois, Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ken Kimble  
Asst. VP/GMM Corp Foods  
Costco Wholesale 
 
 
 
 
Michael McNicholas, Managing Director 
 
 
 
 
Dean Holzer, President  
 
 
 
8 
 
  
 
Catherine LEBOULANGER, Directrice Qualité et 
Développement Durable DAVIGEL SAS 
 
 
 
Katie Schleit, Senior Marine Campaign 
Coordinator 
 
 
 
i.V. Kerstin Jürges, Head of Division for 
Sustainable Purchasing/CSR 
 
      (France)  
 
 
 
 
 
Karly Kelso, Senior Manager, Oceans 
 
 
 
 
 
John V. Young, Specialty Procurement 
 
 
 
 
Harm Jan van Dijk, Founder  
 
 
 
 
 
Tobias Aguirre, Chief Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sean J. O'Scannlain, President & CEO 
 
 
 
 
 
Jose Aller, Sustainability Manager 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Teddy Kho, VP-General Manager, General 
Tuna Corporation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sampath Ragindha Padmawansa, Chief 
Executive Officer, Global Sea Foods (PVT) Ltd.  
 
 
 
Mané Calvo García-Benavides, CEO of the 
Calvo Group 
 
 
 
 
David Pinsky, Senior Oceans Campaigner, 
Greenpeace USA 
 
 
10 
 
 
Kevin Bixler, Global Director, Group Fish 
Procurement 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill DiMento, VP Corporate Sustainability and 
Government Affairs 
 
 
 
Kerry A. Umamoto, President/ COO 
 
 
 
 
Adnan Ali, Managing Director 
 
 
Executive Vice President, Perishables 
 
 
 
 
 
Tim Lycke, President 
 
 
 
 
 
Martin Purves, Managing Director  
 
 
 
Susan Jackson, President 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
Alexander G Pappas, Vice President 
 
 
 
 
Allyson Luettel, Sustainability Coordinator 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Angeles Claro, Sustainability Manager 
 
 
Kevin Bixler, Global Director, Group Fish 
Procurement 
 
 
 
 
Lisa Zwack, Head of Sustainability, The Kroger 
Co. 
 
 
Edward Pickup, Executive Secretary 
 
 
 
Sam Chou, CE 
 
12 
 
 
Michel Biero, Head of Purchasing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kevin Bixler, Global Director, Group Fish 
Procurement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hannah Macintyre, Fisheries & Aquaculture 
Manager 
 
 
 
Isabelle Aelvoet, Global Sustainability Director 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr.  Deirdre Duggan, Director of Programs and 
Science 
 
 
 
Margarita Muñoz, Directora Responsabilidad 
Social  
 
13 
 
 
Veronika Pountcheva, Global Director Corporate 
Responsibility 
 
Andrea Weber, Director Corporate 
Responsibility 
 
 
 
 
Alex Baumer, Director Asian Operations 
 
 
 
 
Sandra Hinni, Seafood Sustainability Specialist 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Margaret Spring, Chief Conservation Officer 
 
 
 
Steven Butts, Heads of Corporate Services, 
Corporate Responsibility 
 
 
 
 
 
Emily Kunen, Global Responsible Sourcing 
Leader, Palm Oil & Seafood 
 
 
 
 
Adam Peasey, Managing Director 
 
 
14 
 
 
Charles W. Laidley, Ph.D., Director of Food 
Safety & Fisheries Sustainability 
 
 
 
 
William F.A. Stride, President 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mané Calvo García-Benavides, CEO of the 
Calvo Group 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ian Ricketts, President 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Julio Morón, Director Gerente 
 
 
 
 
John Steinmetz, Vice President of Business 
Development 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Michel Goujon, Directeur 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
Kevin Bixler, Global Director, Group Fish 
Procurement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Andre Nel, General Manager of Sustainability 
 
 
 
 
Cameron Mackintosh, Managing Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gorka Aspuru, General Manager 
 
 
 
 
R. Logan Kock, Chief Sustainability Officer, CSR 
 
 
 
Stephen Fisher, Sustainability Director 
 
 
 
16 
 
 
 
Rob Johnson, Managing Director 
 
 
 
 
Sal Battaglia, Vice President 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Michael Berkowitz, CEO 
 
 
 
 
Kevin Bixler, Global Director, Group Fish 
Procurement 
 
 
 
 
 
Hamish Walker, Chief Operating Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ron Hall – Service Systems Associates (SSA) – 
VP Procurement 
 
 
17 
 
 
 
Sonja Fordham, President 
 
 
 
 
 
Alex Smolinsky , SHARKPROJECT International  
 
Herbert Futterknecht , SHARKPROJECT Austria  
 
Friederike Kremer-Obrock, SHARKPROJECT 
Germany 
 
 
Denise Smolinsky, SHARKPROJECT 
Switzerland   
 
 
 
 
 
Seck Samba Bébo Ba, Director General, Societé 
d’Exploitation des Ressources Thonières  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Neil Barrett, Senior Vice President Corporate 
Responsibility 
 
 
 
 
 
Dewayne Rabon, Senior Vice President of 
Merchandising 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
(Austria)  
 
Robert Schaumburger. Leiter zentraler, Einkauf 
SPAR 
 
 
 
   
(South Africa)  
 
 
Kevin O’Brien, Group Risk & Sustainability 
Executive 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Andrew Choe, President & CEO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Richard Stavis, Chief Sustainability Officer 
 
John Scott, VP - Global Responsibility, Quality & 
Food Safety  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ruth Westcott, Campaign Coordinator 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr Tom Pickerell, Global Tuna Director 
 
 
 
19 
 
 
 
Amanda Nusz: Vice President, Product Quality 
& Responsible Sourcing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kevin Bixler, Global Director, Group Fish 
Procurement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mark Zimring, Director, Indo-Pacific Tuna 
Program 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rachel Hopkins 
Senior Officer, Global Tuna Conservation 
 
20 
 
 
Clyde Bodenham, Chairman 
 
 
 
 
 
Patrick Murphy, Managing Director 
 
 
 
Mr Mohamed KHACHAB, CEO 
 
 
Antonio Esquival, Tonnino USA 
 
 
 
Christine Heffernan 
Senior Vice President, Center Store 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Renato Curto, President/CEO 
 
 
 
 
Guillermo Morán, Manager 
 
 
 
 
 
Thomas de Kock – CEO 
 
 
21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Helena Melnikov 
Hauptgeschäftsführerin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
John Burns, Vice President Global Quality 
Assurance & Food Safety 
 
 
 
 Feroz Koor, Group Head of Sustainability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
William W Fox, Jr., PhD, VP, Tuna Fisheries 
Conservation 
 
 
 
 
 
John Burton, Founder 
 
22 
 
