1 
 
 
 
COMMISSION 
SIXTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea 
5 – 11 December 2019 
Position Statement to WCPFC16 
WCPFC16-2019-OP05 
15 November 2019 
 
Submitted by World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) 
  
Global Oceans Practice  . 
 
 
 
WWF POSITION 
16th Regular Session of the Western Central Pacific Fisheries 
Commission (WCPFC16): Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea – 
December 5-11, 2019 
 
Introduction 
The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) would like to again thank the Western and Central Pacific 
Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) for the opportunity to attend the 15th Regular Session as an observer 
and to address the critically important role that it plays in the proper management of the (Western 
Central Pacific Ocean) WCPO fisheries.  
WWF once again calls on members of the WCPFC to address the issues and recommendations raised 
at SC15, NC15, TCC15, and WCPFC15 as well as observe the experience of other RFMOs in their own 
efforts to achieve and maintain improved measures for monitoring and surveillance.  WWF would like 
to note that this Position Statement is not comprehensive, but that fact does not mean that WWF does 
not believe that other issues are not important.  WWF wishes to reiterate its position offered in 
Honolulu, Hawaii, in December 2018 (WCPFC15) and, taking into account the WCPFC-related 
meetings held since, the recommendations listed below as well as other documents submitted to the 
WCPFC for review as Observer Papers. 
Reference Points, Harvest Control Rules, and Harvest Strategies 
WWF remains supportive of the work of the WCPFC and subsidiary bodies in pursuing the 
implementation of a Harvest Strategy (HS) approach as agreed under CMM 2014-06 and 
Supplementary Information on Workplan (workplan) for the adoption of Harvest Strategies.  
Consistent with previous WWF position statements and recommendations, WWF continues to 
encourage WCPFC16 to further endorse and support the adoption of explicit Limit and Target 
Reference Points (LRP/TRP), Harvest Control Rules (HCRs), and HSs for all WCPO fishery stocks 
© Gregg Yan/ WWF 
 
 
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 16th Regular Session, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, 5-11 December 2019 
2 
WCPFC16 
under WCPFC authority. WWF further notes that the original agreed timelines have lapsed and there 
is now an urgent need to establish species specific harvest strategies consistent with the workplan. 
WWF requests the WCPFC observe the importance of and strong support for these important 
management measures, specifically the adoption of TRPs and HCRs for the key target species, 
particularly from industry participants with Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) certification and 
many end markets. Therefore, WWF encourages WCPFC16 to maintain momentum on 
implementation of HS elements, and, where necessary, take steps to recover timelines under the 
workplan. 
WWF recommends that the WCPFC: 
• 
Support and endorse further implementation of CMM 2014-06 on Establishing a 
Harvest Strategy for Key Tuna Species in the WCPO consistent with proposed 
timelines; 
• 
Establish precautionary TRPs for bigeye (BET) and yellowfin (YFT); 
• 
Adopt an HCR for the skipjack (SKJ) purse seine (PS) fishery and the South 
Pacific albacore (SP ALB) longline (LL) fishery that fluctuates around the 
established respective TRPs; and 
• 
Endorse the continued development and implementation of LRPs and TRPs for 
proper management of all stocks, including sharks as a priority. 
Sharks and Rays 
Sharks and Rays continue to make up a large percentage of annual bycatch1 with many shark species 
in the WCPO remaining subject to high levels of fishing mortality that current stock assessment trends 
suggest is unsustainable.2  Furthermore, WWF is increasingly concerned with shark conservation and 
sustainability in the WCPFC region as a whole and considers responsible management, trade, and 
consumption where shark mortality occurs in all fishing activities, not just in circumstances where 
tuna fishing is occurring.  Therefore, WCPFC must also recognise the needs of coastal States in the 
WCPFC region to manage their shark populations. 
WWF is extremely disappointed by the failure of the Inter-sessional Working Group to develop agreed 
recommendations for a Comprehensive Shark CMM in 2018. Greater urgency toward shark 
conservation is required in the face of declining shark populations, as evidenced by both the shortfin 
and longfin mako sharks being upgraded to Endangered globally in March this year, and the perilous 
state of the oceanic whitetip shark in the WCPO. SC15 concluded that the oceanic whitetip shark stock 
remains overfished and subject to overfishing, and faces possible extinction despite the prohibition on 
retention, reflecting poorly on WCPFC’s current approaches to preventing the overfishing of sharks.    
Therefore, WWF urges WCPFC16 to prioritize finalizing a Comprehensive Shark CMM that ensures 
key shark and ray species, including those prioritized by the Convention on the International Trade of 
Endangered Species (CITES), are effectively managed.3  WWF continues to support recommendations 
within the proposed CMM to include methods to eliminate finning and incorporate language to 
encourage CCMs to land sharks with their fins naturally attached to their bodies, as well as supporting 
recommendations.4 
Equally urgent, is the need to introduce additional management measures as part of a recovery plan 
for the oceanic whitetip shark, which include addressing catch data quality issues that have arisen due 
to the prohibition on retention. 
While WWF supports the action of the WCPFC to adopt the Best Handling Practices For The Safe 
Release Of Sharks (Other Than Whale Sharks And Mantas/Mobulids), we further recommend that 
additional requirements and procedures are necessary for non-retained shark species, including 
provisions to ensure species ID and removal of trailing gear. WWF also again asks the WCPFC16 to 
consider a prohibition to setting on or retention of manta rays (genus Mobula and Manta) and 
 
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 16th Regular Session, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, 5-11 December 2019 
 
 
3 
WWF Position 
support associated best practices for safe handling and release aboard purse seiners, consistent with 
previous action by the IATTC. 
WWF recommends the WCPFC: 
• 
Adopt a Comprehensive Shark CMM that includes a new framework 
incorporating existing CMMs, but also providing for national contributions 
toward commonly agreed goals for shark stocks, including: 
o Mandate bycatch best practices consistent with those found in the 
Compendium of Best Practice of Conservation and Management 
Measures (CMMs) for the of Species Bycatch in Tuna RFMOs; 
o Establish Fins Naturally Attached (FNA) as the most effective means to 
address shark finning in the WCPO consistent with the best available 
science; 
o Implement the recommendations for bycatch that were endorsed at Kobe 
III and adopt an annually updated report card system against these 
recommendations for all of the WCPFC fisheries; 
o Require, through data collected from observer programs and other 
means, estimation of the number of captures and releases of all sharks 
and rays, including the status upon release (dead or alive), and reporting 
of this information to the WCPFC;  
o Amends CMM 2014-05 to prohibit vessels carrying wire trace and the use 
of wire trace branch lines; 
o Require, through observer programs, recording what gear is used in 
longline activities including the use of wire traces and any multi- 
monofilament traces in order to avoid bite-off by sharks; and 
o Enact recovery plans for the most depleted species; 
• 
Take steps to introduce a recovery plan for the oceanic whitetip shark in the near 
term; 
• 
Adopt the Draft Guidelines for Best Handling Practices for the Safe Release of 
Mantas and Mobulids; 
• 
Adopt a retention prohibition for bigeye thresher shark, as the previous 
assessment indicates that management action is necessary for this vulnerable 
species; 
• 
Encourage the development of harvest strategies, including associated reference 
points and control rules, for all shark and ray species, as envisaged under 
Articles 5 and 10 of the WCPF Convention; and 
• 
Encourage CCMs to develop NPOAs with measures to report all shark and ray 
catches from domestic fleets operating in territorial and archipelagic waters to 
assist CCMs to meet obligations for shark and ray species incorporated under 
CITES Appendix II, including making any non-detriment finding publicly 
available. 
Regional Observer Programme 
It is unquestionable that information collected as part of a successful observer programme is critically 
important to the proper conservation and management of a fishery.  Data collected by observers plays 
a central role in informing fisheries scientists and managers on everything ranging from stock 
assessments to non-target species impacts.5  Furthermore, observers play an indispensable role in 
 
 
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 16th Regular Session, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, 5-11 December 2019 
4 
WCPFC16 
monitoring and documenting compliance with very important CMMs in the WCPO.6  Therefore, the 
WCPFC must consider securing appropriate observer coverage a top priority. 
All CCMs agreed to the Convention on the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish 
Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPF Convention) text and other Commission 
obligations to ensure the best scientific information or evidence available is used in WCPFC 
decisions.7  By its plain reading, this obligation not only requires CCMs to actively seek out and use the 
best available scientific evidence, but also compels CCMs to ensure that measures taken result in the 
generation of the best available scientific evidence.8  Any other interpretation would be absurd.  
Therefore, the WCPFC is obligated under the WCPF Convention to put data collection processes in 
place that secure the production and use of the best available scientific evidence in the WCPFC 
decision making process. 
Observer Safety and Security 
WWF again commends the WCPFC’s previous actions to address issues with observer safety and 
security through the adoption of the observer safety and security provisions as well as the flag and 
coastal state requirements.  However, WWF continues to strongly believe that more needs to be done 
to fully address observer safety and security.  
WWF remains concerned with reports that some CCMs are still not meeting their obligations to 
provide observers with the required safety and security equipment.  It has been more than two years 
since CCMs agreed CMM 2017-03 Conservation and Management Measure for the Protection of 
WCPFC Regional Observer Programme Observers, so the requirements must be met post-haste. 
Additionally, WWF maintains that there is a need for a full and transparent documentation and 
catalogue of observer incidents.  One of the outstanding gaps in observer safety and security is 
represented by the lack of information available to address observer incidents through proper 
followup and documentation.  A requirement for full and transparent reporting will allow for 
identification and understanding of potentially dangerous situations for future observers across all 
RFMOs.  Until the WCPFC can fully understand the circumstances surrounding these incidents, it 
cannot hope to properly address them. 
The ROP Annual Report as it currently exists does not provide the necessary level of detail to properly 
address these issues.  Thus, WWF recommends establishing a required comprehensive and 
transparent reporting procedure for observers and observer programmes to report instances of 
threats, harassment, intimidation, assault, or death that national programmes and the ROP could 
then use to determine solutions to prevent future instances and share that information with other 
RFMOs.  This procedure must include an annual, publicly available, consolidated, detailed, and fully 
transparent report of all infractions against observers. 
Calculation of Observer Coverage Metric 
Over 12 years ago, the WCPFC established CMM 2007-01, which specified that fisheries observer 
coverage is to be 5% of effort in each non-purse seine fishery under the jurisdiction of the Commission 
and shall be achieved no later than 30 June 2012.9  Specifically, low observer coverage in the longline 
fishery was identified as a significant conservation risk.  As indicated by the discussion at that time as 
well as discussion among CCMs at WCPFC forums since, the arbitrary benchmark established at 5% 
was considered a starting point for a stepwise progression toward appropriate observer coverage.  Not 
only has achieving the principal objective of CMM 2007-01 proven difficult, but even measuring how 
it is achieved remains unsettled.   
At the moment, CCMs self report their longline observer coverage under four separate metrics 
including:10 
• 
Days at Sea - days observer is at sea compared to number of days fleet is at sea; 
• 
Number of Trips - number of observer trips compared to trips by the fleet; 
• 
Days Fished - observed fishing days compared to fleets fishing days; and 
 
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 16th Regular Session, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, 5-11 December 2019 
 
 
5 
WWF Position 
• 
Number of Hooks - number of hooks observed compared to fleet hooks used. 
Because these metrics are each calculated differently and subject to different biases, it places an undue 
burden on the scientific service provider to standardise data in such a way as to properly assess 
coverage.  First, it forces the scientific service provider, and ultimately the WCPFC, to “compare 
apples with oranges” in a way that frustrates efficient analysis and, ultimately, timely and proper 
management. Second, by using a metric that is more susceptible measurement error, bias, and 
estimation error, it leads to greater uncertainty and the problem of “garbage in, garbage out” that 
leads to management failures.  Moreover, because of the biases of the different metrics, it creates 
inequity among CCMs that places more of the conservation burden on those using a more accurate 
and precise metric that is less susceptible to bias and manipulation.   
The best available scientific information suggests that “number of hooks” represents the best method 
for achieving multiple objectives, including effectively calculating effort and accurately assessing rare 
events like seabird interactions.11  Furthermore, three CCMs are currently assessing their observer 
coverage based on “number of hooks,” hence it is practically feasible. Consequently, WWF 
recommends that the WCPFC confirm “number of hooks” as the best practice metric for all CCMs 
calculating observer coverage on longline vessels and mandate a 5-year time frame to shift to use of 
this metric.  If other metrics for calculating coverage are used in the transition toward “number of 
hooks,” the WCPFC should clearly define terms in advance and CCMs must calculate and report each 
metric in a way that is comparable to and consistent with “number of hooks.” 
Level of Observer Coverage 
Recent efforts by the scientific service provider to standardise observer coverage data indicate that 
region-wide observer coverage could be at or slightly above 5%.12  However, the best available 
scientific evidence indicates that even a consistently applied level of 5% coverage is statistically and 
practically useless to effectively achieve most management13 or compliance objectives.14   
Low observer coverage exacerbates bias as a result of fishers altering their fishing practices (e.g. 
discarding practices, handling and release practices, effort) and gear when an observer is present, 
which is a phenomenon known as the “observer effect.”15  The higher the observer coverage rate, the 
lower the bias from an observer effect is, as the larger the proportion of fishing effort that is observed, 
the more accurately the monitoring data characterize or represent the fishery.  Notwithstanding the 
observer effect, at just 5%, current observer coverage is neither producing the quality nor quantity of 
data necessary to adequately manage fisheries under WCPFC authority. 
At present, a lack of sufficient data that is typically generated through adequate observer coverage 
represents the single largest obstacle to establishing appropriate management measures.  Uncertainty 
is continually cited in the WCPFC process as a reason for inaction, while the improved certainty 
offered by better observer coverage is consistently rejected.  In fact, at the recent 15th Meeting of the 
Scientific Committee (SC15) one member stated that, “they could not accept any requirement for 
observer coverage greater than 5%.” 
WWF concedes that different minimum levels of observer coverage may be appropriate for different 
management or compliance purposes, depending on specific identified objectives.  However, data 
collected under less than 100% coverage may be biased and misrepresent the fishery overall, resulting 
in potential management failures.  Alternatively, 100% observer coverage, through human or 
electronic observers, would result in no bias from an observer effect.   Thus, along with a consortium 
of other NGOs and with the support of prominent market partners, we have determined that because 
of conservation and compliance problems such as illegal fishing, misreported or unreported catch, 
and bycatch of endangered, threatened and protected species, that only an observer coverage rate of 
no less than 100%, through human or electronic observers, is acceptable.16 
By continuing to fail to secure a scientifically or statistically valid level of observer coverage on 
longline vessels, the WCPFC fails to meet the charge of the WCPF Convention to generate and use the 
best available scientific information. Therefore, the WCPFC must take action to improve observer 
coverage across all longline vessels operating in the WCPFC Convention Area. 
 
 
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 16th Regular Session, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, 5-11 December 2019 
6 
WCPFC16 
WWF recommends the WCPFC: 
• 
Ensure the requirements of CMM 2017-03 have been met; 
• 
Endorse further observer safety and security measures, including fully 
transparent documentation and catalogue of observer incidents and entities 
involved; 
• 
Endorse the calculation of observer coverage on the basis of “number of hooks” 
as best practice and mandate a transition to calculation of observer coverage 
based on “number of hooks” by 2025; and 
• 
Establish a plan to increase observer coverage, by human observers or electronic 
monitoring, across all longline vessels operating in the WCPFC Convention Area 
on an annual basis to achieve 100% coverage by 2025. 
Transhipment Monitoring 
Transhipment remains one of the most prominent weaknesses in catch documentation and 
verification that leads to Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated (IUU) catch in the WCPO.  WWF notes 
that the most simple, efficient, and effective solution to the challenges of transhipment-related IUU is 
to simply prohibit all at-sea transhipment and require all fishing vessels to either tranship or land 
their catch at the nearest available designated port in the WCPO following the conclusion of fishing 
activity.  However, acknowledging that a prohibition on transhipment is politically unlikely at this 
time, WWF supports the establishment of the Transhipment Intersessional Working Group and 
associated review and revision of CMM 2009-06 to address deficiencies in the current measure. 
Some CCMs remain consistently non-compliant with CMM 2009-06. Reports presented at TCC15 
indicate that the number of reported high seas transhipment events increased 155% between 2014 and 
2018, with an increase of 29% between 2017 and 2018.  These CCMs also continue to fail to meet their 
reporting obligations.  Therefore, given the high risk of transhipment to facilitate IUU fishing and the 
ongoing non-compliance associated with the practice, the WCPFC must urgently address the 
deficiencies in CMM 2009-06. 
WWF recommends the WCPFC: 
• 
Implement real time, or near real-time, reporting requirements for all 
components of transhipments, including electronic verification and validation 
tools; 
• 
Review and revise CMM 2009-06, including replacing the ‘impracticability’ test 
and unfettered flag State authorization with clear criteria and a process for the 
WCPFC to review issued flag State authorizations against those criteria to 
ensure compliance;  
• 
Include bunkering vessels in transhipment management arrangements; and 
• 
Consider automatically including any vessel that breaches transhipment 
regulations on the draft IUU vessel list. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 16th Regular Session, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, 5-11 December 2019 
 
 
7 
WWF Position 
* * * This page intentionally left blank. * * * 
 
 
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 16th Regular Session, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, 5-11 December 2019 
8 
WCPFC16 
 
 
                                                
1 Status of pelagic eslasmobranchs (sharks and rays) of the Western and Central Pacific Ocean as prepared by the IUCN Shark Specialist 
Group at the New Zealand and Oceania Shark Red List Assessment Workshop, Auckland, (June 2017). 
2 Clarke, Shelley C., et al. (2013). Population Trends in Pacific Oceanic Sharks and the Utility of Regulations on Shark Finning. 
Conservation Biology, Volume 27, Issue 4, pages 197–209, February. 
3 Report for Project 78-Analysis of Observer and Logbook Data Pertaining to Key Shark Species in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, 
Joel Rice, WCPFC-SC14-2018/EB-WP-07. 
4 Clarke, Shelley C. (2013). Towards an Integrated Shark Conservation and Management Measure for the Western and Central Pacific 
Ocean. WCPFC-SC9-2013/ EB-WP-08. WCPFC-SC, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia, 6-14 August 2013. 
5 See e.g. Davies, S.L. 2003. Guidelines for Developing an at-Sea Fishery Observer Programme.  FAO 
Fisheries Technical Paper 414, ISSN 0429-9345. Food And Agriculture Organization Of The United Nations, Rome. 
6 Id at 5. (Observers can register compliance with fisheries management laws, regulations and plans; record catch composition, prohibited 
species, by-catch, size limits, discarding, area and gear restrictions; validate vessel logbooks and the labelling of processed fish.); see also 
Palma, M.A.E. 2010. Promoting Sustainable Fisheries: The International Legal and Policy Framework to Combat Illegal, Unreported and 
Unregulated Fishing. Volume 6 of Legal Aspects of Sustainable Development, ISBN 9789004175754. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, p. 142. 
7 The Convention on the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western Pacific Ocean (WCPF Convention) 
establishes the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC). Convention on the Conservation and Management of Highly 
Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, Part II, Article 5, paragraph (b) ("...the members of the Commission 
shall...ensure that such measures are based on the best scientific evidence available…"), Sept. 5, 2000, 2275 U.N.T.S. 40532, 
https://www.wcpfc.int/system/files/text.pdf. 
8 Id at Part III, Article 10, paragraph (1)(e) ("...the functions of the Commission shall be to…compile and disseminate accurate and complete 
statistical data to ensure that the best scientific information is available…"). 
9 WCPFC, Conservation and Management Measure for the Regional Observer Programme, at 34, CMM 2009–06 (Dec. 7-11, 2009), 
https://www.wcpfc.int/doc/cmm-2007-01/conservation-and-management-measure-regional-observer-programme [Superseded by CMM 
2018–05, which consolidated other observer related issues into a single measure] 
10 WCPFC, Status Of Observer Data Management, WCPFC-TCC15-2019-IP04, at 20, Table 4 (Sept. 2, 2019)  
11  Dietrich, K. et al. Best Practices for the Collection of Longline Data to Facilitate Research and Analysis to Reduce Bycatch of Protected 
Species, NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-OPR-35 March 2007. at 25, March 2007. (“Fishing effort can be derived from information 
collected on number of hooks deployed or retrieved. The number of hooks deployed was ranked as critical or preferred by 81% of data 
user[s]…”); see also IATTC, Scientific Advisory Committee, SAC-10-04 – Longline observer program reports, at 2 (13-17 May 
2019)(“Number of hooks is considered a more accurate measure of longline effort.”); see also IATTC, Scientific Advisory Committee, 
SAC-10 INF-H - Standardization of Reporting Formats and Effort Reporting for Longline Fisheries (Resolution C-11-08), at 3, (13-17 May 
2019) (“…number of hooks is the most precise, and is the standard metric used both by the other tuna RFMOs and by the IATTC for 
scientific purposes.”) 
12 Supra note 10 at 23-24, Tables 5 and 6. (Sept. 2, 2019). 
13 See Lawson, T. 2003. Observer coverage rates and the accuracy and reliability of estimates of CPUE for offshore longline fleets targeting 
South Pacific albacore. Working Paper SWG–4. Sixteenth Meeting of the Standing Committee on Tuna and Billifsh, 9–16 July 2003, 
Mooloolaba, Queensland, Australia. Oceanic Fisheries Programme, Secretariat of the Pacific Community, Noumea, New Caledonia.; See 
also Lawson, T. 2004. Observer coverage rates and reliability of CPUE estimates for offshore longliners in tropical waters of the Western 
and Central Pacific Ocean. Working Paper SWG-4, Seventeenth Meeting of the Standing Committee on Tuna and Billfish, 9-18 August 
2004, Majuro, Republic of Marshall Islands.  
14 Benoit, H., Allard, J. 2009. Can the data from at-sea observer surveys be used to make general inferences about catch composition and 
discards? Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 66: 2025-2039.; Babcock, E.A., E.K. Pikitch, G. Hudson. 2003. How Much Observer Coverage is 
Enough to Adequately Estimate Bycatch? Pew Institute for Ocean Science, Miami, FL, and Oceana. Washington. 
15 Gilman, Eric & Zimring, Mark. 2018. Meeting the objectives of fisheries observer programs through electronic monitoring. 
10.13140/RG.2.2.28000.99846. 
16  Leading Environmental NGOs Stand Together to Call for 100% Observer Coverage on Industrial Tuna Fishing Vessels (June 29, 2019) 
retrievable at https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/leading-environmental-ngos-stand-together-to-call-for-100-observer-coverage-
on-industrial-tuna-fishing-vessels-300873686.html.    
            
   ●   POSITION                                            WWF.PANDA.ORG                                 
WWF.PANDA.ORG/SMARTFISHING
© 1986 Panda Symbol WWF - World Wide Fund For Nature (Formerly World Wildlife Fund) 
® “WWF” is a WWF Registered Trademark. 
 
 
For more information  
 
Alfred “Bubba” Cook 
WCP Tuna Program Manager 
acook@wwf.panda.org 
Tel: +64 (0)27 833 0537 
  
 
 
WWF-New Zealand 
PO Box 6237, Marion Square                                          
Wellington 6141, New Zealand  
Tel. +64 (0) 4 499 2930 
 
 
 
 
