 
 
TWELFTH REGULAR SESSION 
Bali, Indonesia  
3 - 8 December 2015 
 
WWF POSITION STATEMENT FOR WCPFC12 
 
WCPFC12-2015-OP02 
13 November 2015 
 
 
 
 
Paper by World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) 
 
 
 
WWF POSITION
12th Regular Session of the Western Central Pacific Fisheries
Commission (WCPFC): Bali, Indonesia – December 3-8, 2015
Introduction
The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) would like to again thank the Western and Central Pacific
Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) for the opportunity to attend the 12th Regular Session as an observer
and to address the critically important role that it plays in the proper management of the (Western
Central Pacific Ocean) WCPO fisheries.
WWF once again calls on members of the WCPFC to address the issues and recommendations raised
at SC11, TCC11, and WCPFC11 as well as observe the experience of other RFMOs in their own efforts to
achieve and maintain improved measures for monitoring and surveillance.  WWF would like to note
that this Position Statement is not comprehensive, but that fact does not mean that WWF does not
think that other issues not included herein are not important.  WWF wishes to reiterate its position
offered in Apia, Samoa, in December 2014 (WCPFC11) and, taking into account the WCPFC-related
meetings held since, the recommendations listed below as well as other documents submitted to the
WCPFC for review as Observer Papers.
Reference Points, Harvest Control Rules, and Harvest Strategies
WWF  remains  supportive  of  the  work  of  the  WCPFC  and  subsidiary  bodies  in  pursuing  the
implementation of Reference Points (RP), Harvest Control Rules (HCR), and Harvest Strategies (HS).
Consistent with previous WWF position statements and recommendations, WWF encourages the
WCPFC12 to develop and implement the adoption of explicit Target Reference Points (TRPs), HCRs,
and HSs for all WCPO fishery stocks under WCPFC authority.
Therefore, WWF welcomes CMM 2014-06 to develop and implement a harvest strategy approach for
key  fisheries  and  stocks  in  the  WCPO.   We  support  the  approach  that  the  CMM  seeks  the
Commission’s agreement to formally develop a HS approach to fisheries for the major tuna stocks
under the Commission’s purview with a goal toward achieving individual harvest strategies for specific
fisheries developed in accordance with this CMM that, in turn, set out the management actions
necessary to achieve defined biological, economic, and social objectives for each fishery.  If WCPFC12
takes appropriate action on this CMM and recommendations from the Harvest Strategy Workshop
(HSW), it will provide a sufficient framework for moving forward management in a methodical way to
© Gregg Yan/ WWF
POSITION
2015
DECEMBER
Smart Fishing Initiative
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 12th Regular Session, Bali, Indonesia, 3-8 December 2015
2
result in valid and effective RPs and HCRs as well as a formalised Management Strategy Evaluation
(MSE) process.
WWF strongly commends the initiative of the Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA) to establish and
implement a TRP for the SKJ stock in PNA waters.  WWF also supports the Pacific Island Forum
Fisheries Agency’s (FFA) development of CMM for a TRP for South Pacific albacore (SPA) recently
presented for review by the WCPFC.  Both proposals present well-defined, scientifically-based, and
strong  commitments  to  sustainability  and  precaution.   We  strongly  encourage  the  Commission  to
adopt these TRPs for implementation throughout the WCPO. Lastly, WWF notes the SC11 and TCC11
support for the analyses of these important management measures as well as their recommendation
that WCPFC12 take the results of the papers presented at this meeting into consideration when
considering the adoption of TRPs and HCRs for the key target species.
WWF recommends that the WCPFC:
•
Adopt and implement the proposed timelines and recommendations for fully
implementing CMM 2014-06;
•
Adopt and Implement a CMM consistent with proposed recommendations on a
TRP for skipjack tuna at a level of 0.50SSBF=0,t1-t2;
•
Adopt and Implement a CMM consistent with proposed recommendations on a
TRP for South Pacific albacore Tuna at a level of 0.45SSBF=0;
•
Support the continued development and implementation of LRPs and TRPs as a
priority for proper management of all stocks;
•
Support interim precautionary TRPs as a benchmark for further consideration in
all other stocks managed by the WCPFC in 2015; and
•
Support the continued development and implementation of HCRs that ensure
the transparent and efficient management of stocks in relation to LRPs and
TRPs.
Sharks and Rays
Many shark species in the WCPO remain subject to high levels of fishing mortality that current stock
assessment trends suggest could be unsustainable.1  Sharks play a critical role in the WCPO marine
ecosystem as apex predators and indicators of ecosystem health.2  WWF  is  concerned  with  shark
conservation and sustainability in the WCPFC region as a whole and considers responsible
management, trade, and consumption where shark mortality occurs in all fishing activities, not just in
circumstances where tuna fishing is occurring.  Therefore, WCPFC must also recognise the needs of
coastal States in the WCPFC region to manage their shark populations.
Although WWF supports the minor action taken by the WCPFC in CMM 2014-05 Conservation and
Management Measure for Sharks3, WWF continues to support recommendations made previously by
the  SC  and  drawn  from  the  discussion  regarding  a  proposed  comprehensive  and  integrated  shark
CMM.4  By way of reference, we again endorse the recommendations contained in sections 4.1 and 4.2
of the paper previously presented by Dr. Shelley Clarke in addition to measures recommended below.5
Furthermore, WWF endorses the recent action taken by the Inter-American Tropical Tuna
Commission  (IATTC)  to  support  best  practices  for  safe  handling  and  release  manta  rays  (genus
Mobula and Manta) aboard purse seiners.  Consistent with additional calls from CCMs during the
SC11 meeting, WWF encourages the WCPFC to pursue equivalent or consistent measures for mantas
in the WCPFC Convention Area.
WWF recommends the WCPFC:
•
Develop, endorse, and recommend adoption of a Comprehensive Shark CMM that
includes efforts to:
o
Mandate bycatch best practices consistent with those found in the
Compendium of Best Practice of Conservation and Management Measures
(CMMs) for the of Species Bycatch in Tuna RFMOs;
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 12th Regular Session, Bali, Indonesia, 3-8 December 2015
3
o
Implement the recommendations for bycatch that were endorsed at Kobe III
and adopt an annually updated report card system against these
recommendations for all of the WCPFC fisheries;
o
Require, through data collected from observer programs and other means,
estimation of the number of captures and releases of all sharks and rays,
including the status upon release (dead or alive), and reporting of this
information to the WCPFC;
o
Require, through observer programs, recording what gear is used in longline
activities including the use of wire traces and any multi- monofilament traces
in order to avoid bite-off by sharks;
o
Introduce a scheme to document the capture and trade of sharks whereby it
allows for traceability through to the final market state and consider the
recommendations included in the TRAFFIC report produced for the CITES
Secretariat when developing such a scheme; and
o
Ensure the implementation requirements for CITES listed sharks are
undertaken by CITES Parties and Non-Parties trading with CITES Parties
where they are required to make non-detriment and legal findings in order to
issue export permits for trade in these species.6 Where WCPFC members make
non-detriment findings for shark species they should share with the WCPFC
details of those findings so that the WCPFC Secretariat can provide information
to the CITES Standing Committee working group on sharks before January
2016. 7
•
Develop, endorse, and recommend safe handling and release practices for manta
rays (genus Mobula and Manta) aboard purse seiners;
•
Encourage the development of reference points and management for non-target
species, including all shark and ray species, as envisaged under Articles 5 and 10
of the WCPF Convention;
•
Encourage CCM’s to report all shark and ray catches from domestic fleets
operating in territorial and archipelagic waters; and
•
Endorse recommendations made in EB-WP-03, EB-IP-05, EB-WP-06, and EB-WP-
08 submitted for SC11, including introducing safe handling practices for whale
sharks (Rhincodon typus) caught within WCPFC purse seine fisheries; and
•
Revise and amend the shark reporting processes to WCPFC to streamline shark-
related data and to close data gaps.
Sea Turtles
WWF supports the recent intervention at TCC11 by the United States requesting renewed focus on sea
turtle bycatch in the WCPO tuna fisheries.  WWF continues to believe that CMM 2008-03 for the
Conservation and Management of Sea Turtles has  not  demonstrably  reduced  bycatch  impacts  on
threatened and endangered sea turtles in the region. The cumulative impact of increasing numbers of
longline vessels in the WCPO on sea turtles remains problematic, and there has been insufficient
uptake of proven bycatch mitigation measures such as circle hook and/or finfish bait. All 6 species of
sea turtles in the WCPO remain threatened or endangered. With no evidence of CMM 2008-03 having
slowed or reversed negative trends on threatened and endangered sea turtle populations, the burden
of proof remains on the WCPFC to demonstrate that sea turtle bycatch impacts in tuna operations are
being minimized, and to take stronger measures if they are not being minimized.
WWF believes that there exists a strong basis for revising CMM 2008-03 to: (1) ensure more suitable
requirements for the determination of optimal bycatch mitigation packages (i.e. circle hooks and/or
other measures, such as finfish bait) for individual fisheries; (2) reduce the ambiguity in language; and
(3) improve the definition of the desired outcomes of the CMM. Moreover, evidence suggests that the
WCPFC and member states have not suitably monitored the CMM for effectiveness with some parts of
the CMM distinguished as providing “excessive room for creative compliance.”8  While CMM 2008-03
requires  all  longline  vessels  to  carry  turtle  de-hookers  and  line  cutters,  WCPFC  has  provided  no
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 12th Regular Session, Bali, Indonesia, 3-8 December 2015
4
monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the  effectiveness  of  this  requirement,  and  only  a  small  fraction  of
member countries have conducted dedicated research on sea turtle mitigation techniques.9  Indeed, as
recently as 2010 over three quarters of CCMs either did not report on compliance with CMM 2008-03
or did not meet all the CMM measures.  Furthermore, only a small fraction of member countries have
conducted dedicated research on sea turtle mitigation techniques, and current observer coverage falls
well below the recommended level for effectively determining optimal mitigation approaches (i.e. 10%
coverage over 3 years).
The precautionary principle requires that all CCMs must determine optimal bycatch mitigation
strategies based on research and sound science.  Most importantly, WWF believes that the WCPFC
should reconsider CMM 2008-03 in light of new information available regarding fisheries impacts on
sea turtles and the impacts of various mitigation measures on turtle bycatch.10  Specifically, recent
studies in the Eastern Pacific Ocean, as well as at-sea trials by WWF in Vietnam and Papua New
Guinea, further confirm the positive impact of turtle bycatch mitigation using circle hooks, thereby
indicating a need for further consideration and adoption of circle hooks in the WCPO longline
fisheries.11
WWF recommends the WCPFC:
•
Consider and develop revisions of CMM 2008-3 aimed at:
o
reducing the ambiguity in language, strengthening key language and reducing
the vagueness in desired outcomes of the CMM, thereby enabling better
monitoring of CMM effectiveness;
o
introducing new binding measures for the use of circle hooks in all longline
fleets, exempted only if an equally effective solution for the mortality of sea
turtles can be demonstrated;
o
introducing stronger measures for conducting research on mitigation
techniques and reporting on sea turtle impacts, as a means of determining
optimal mitigation packages for individual fleets; and
o
setting an appropriate interim catch rate that would trigger move-on
provisions.
•
Encourage member state involvement and participation in the research conducted
under the analysis of sea turtle mitigation measure effectiveness in tuna longline
fisheries described in EB-WP-05 presented at SC11.
Tropical Tunas
WWF maintains that the policy choices made repeatedly by the WCPFC fail to achieve meaningful
conservation  of  BET.   WWF  also  believe  that  there  could  be  substantial  improvements  to  the
understanding of the impact of Fish Aggregating Devices (FADs) through the aggressive pursuit of
improved monitoring, surveillance, and general research involving FADs followed by appropriately
targeted limits or management measures.  While there are ongoing efforts within the SPC and PNA to
pursue greater understanding of FAD dynamics, we believe that the WCPFC should impose measures
in  support  of  FAD  research  aided  by  monitoring  and  surveillance  mechanisms  which  could,  for
instance, improve the understanding of the impacts on species composition resulting from:
•
FAD type/size
•
Geographic location
•
Drift patterns and prevailing currents
•
Ocean depth and depth of FAD materials
•
Proximity to benthic relief/hydrogeographic features
The WCPFC absolutely must make effective and enforceable reductions of the catch in all sectors to
achieve a meaningful conservation impact for BET.  Most importantly, whatever measures the WCPFC
selects absolutely must be subject to strong monitoring, control, and surveillance measures
WWF recommends that the WCPFC:
•
Establish and support further research and monitoring of FADs;
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 12th Regular Session, Bali, Indonesia, 3-8 December 2015
5
•
Engage in an open and transparent deliberative process based on the best
available scientific information to determine the level of reductions in BET catch
necessary to achieve meaningful BET conservation; and
•
Revise the current Tropical Tunas CMM to achieve substantial reductions in BET
mortality.
Regional Observer Programme
Information collected as part of an appropriate observer programme is critically important to the
proper  management  of  a  fishery.   Data  collected  by  observers  plays  a  central  role  in  informing
fisheries scientists on everything ranging from stock assessments to non-target species impacts.
Furthermore, observers play an indispensable role in monitoring and enforcing very important CMMs
in the WCPO.  Indeed, observers represent the vanguard of fisheries management through the science
and service that they provide.  Consequently, observer coverage and the safety and security of those
observers must be considered a top priority and greater support must be provided to the relevant
authority to see that the capacity of the ROP is strengthened.
Observer Programme Management and Administration
The WCPFC must ensure, through appropriate guidance, that national observer programmes
administered under the ROP are fully resourced in terms of human and financial capital as well as
governed under appropriate administrative and management structures.  Within that consideration,
the WCPFC must contemplate different funding models that CCMs may consider for ensuring proper
administration and management of the observer program at a national level, including those that
incorporate sustainable financing through a valid and functional cost recovery system.  The WCPFC
has given inadequate consideration to the necessary resourcing of one of the most critical parts of
fisheries management in the region, the national and regional observer programmes.  Urgent
attention must be given to the development and full funding of minimum standards that ensure a
national programme can perform to ROP standards, including such efforts as continued annual
reviews of the national programs under pre-agreed performance standards as well as continued
regular training for all regional and national observer programme staff.
Observer Coverage on Longline Vessels
WWF notes that observer coverage on longline vessels operating in the WCPO, regardless of the
metrics used to calculate it, remains substantially less than 5% region-wide.  Moreover, WWF wishes
to point out that the 5% observer coverage value identified by the WCPFC represents an arbitrary
benchmark that was never intended to represent an “end goal,” but rather a minimum starting point
toward appropriate observer coverage.  Even a consistently applied level of 5% coverage is statistically
and practically useless for most management or monitoring, control, and surveillance (MCS)
purposes.  Therefore, WWF supports efforts to improve the observer coverage of all longline fisheries
in  the  WCPO.   As  such,  WWF  supports  calculating  observer  coverage  according  to  the  proposed
hierarchy of four metrics for assessing observer coverage, but notes that best practice would be to use
“number of hooks deployed” as an appropriate metric.  If other metrics for calculating coverage are
used, terms must be very clearly defined in advance and each metric must be calculated in a way to be
comparable to the other metrics.
WWF also notes that different levels of observer coverage may be required for management or
compliance purposes, depending on specific identified objectives, and recommends that appropriate
analyses be conducted to determine each of those levels respectively in the context of identified
objectives.  Most  importantly,  the  WCPFC  must  demand  that  the  ROP  and  national  observer
programmes receive full funding and support to ensure their continued operation and that the level of
observer coverage on longline vessels be increased immediately to achieve management and
compliance objectives.
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 12th Regular Session, Bali, Indonesia, 3-8 December 2015
6
Transhipment Monitoring
Transhipment  remains  one  of  the  most  prominent  weaknesses  in  catch  documentation  and
verification that leads to Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated (IUU) catch in the WCPO.  WWF notes
that the most simple, efficient, and effective solution to the challenges of transhipment-related IUU is
to  simply  prohibit  all  at-sea  transhipment  and  require  all  fishing  vessels  to  land  their  catch  at  the
nearest available designated port in the WCPO following the conclusion of fishing activity.  However,
acknowledging  that  a  prohibition  on  transhipment  is  unlikely  at  this  point,  WWF  supports  an
unequivocal 100% observer monitoring requirement for all transhipments.
WWF further encourages the Commission to consider the recommendations of the IWG-ROP to adopt
the  proposed  amendments  to  CMM  2009-06,  to  establish  additional  reporting  requirements  for
receiving vessels operating in the Convention Area.12  WWF  also  supports  the  guidelines  and
suggested  format  for  reporting  to  the  Secretariat,  although  WWF  would  also  encourage  the
development of fully electronic templates.13   Most importantly, WWF strongly recommends that, due
to the prominent compliance monitoring role of transhipment observers, that they receive two-way
communication devices described in the following section as a matter of urgent priority.
WWF also recommends that transhipment requirements be buttressed by verification and validation
of transhipment activities through the use of a vessel monitoring system (VMS) and supplemented by
an operating automated identification system (AIS).  If through investigation of suspected unreported
transhipment activity indicated by VMS and corroborated by AIS, it is determined that transhipment
activity was conducted in violation of transhipment rules, the offending vessel should be subject to
sanctions up to and including listing on the IUU vessel blacklist.
Observer Safety and Security
In the course of their official duties, observers are vulnerable to assault, obstruction, resistance, delay,
intimidation, or interference, which are all very clear violations under CMM 2007-01 Attachment K,
Annex 1, Paragraph 1(i).  Thus, observer providers and authorities have a discrete obligation to
address alleged violations reported by observers quickly and effectively.  When national or regional
observer programmes and other authorities fail to address these reported violations effectively and in
a  timely  manner,  it  signals  to  the  observer  that  providers  either  do  not  care  or  are  incapable  of
providing support for their welfare.  Moreover, the failure of providers or the national authorities to
act on a report has an additional effect of signalling to vessel captains and crew that they may conduct
violations against observers without retribution.
Following recent tragedies involving observers both in the WCPFC and IATTC Convention areas, the
WCPFC must urgently address observer safety and security standards. The WCPFC must immediately
adopt standards that include the means for an observer to independently report or otherwise signal in
real time any emergency including interference or assault.  Currently available technology could allow
direct and independent communication between observers and observer providers.  Many of the
devices also operate as a waterproof Personal Locator Beacons (PLBs) in cases of an accidental
overboard situation. Furthermore, observer programmes must also urgently adopt an Emergency
Action Plan (EAP) that designates procedures to ensure that observer emergencies can be quickly and
effectively responded to by authorities.  The technology tools are effectively useless to the observer if
there is nobody designated to respond on the other end. WWF believes that every observer should be
issued one of these devices and observer programmes must have a well-defined and effective EAP in
place prior to any observer deployment
Lastly, the WCPFC must also implement a recordkeeping and reporting mechanism that requires any
violations against observers to be forwarded to the WCPFC Secretariat (Secretariat) as soon as
possible after the incident has occurred. By informing the Secretariat, the Secretariat may then alert
and potentially coordinate with other observer programmes immediately, such as in cases of man
overboard situations that require search and recovery coordination.  The Secretariat could also offer
assistance to the programme and the observer where possible as well as provide follow-up to ensure
corrective actions have been taken on behalf of the observer. More importantly, the Secretariat could
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 12th Regular Session, Bali, Indonesia, 3-8 December 2015
7
maintain a record of vessels and crewmembers involved in violations against observers, which could
be made available to observer providers to better assess future placement of observers and avoid
potential escalation of threats against observers.
WWF recommends the WCPFC:
•
Further implement of a binding, consistent, and consolidated set of standards for
the ROP;
•
Develop an analysis of the observer programme in the context of proper
management, including an analysis of different sustainable funding models;
•
Endorse an analysis of levels of observer coverage required to achieve
management or compliance purposes while ensuring that the metrics and
methodologies used support development of appropriate comparative analyses;
•
Support or endorse the use of VMS and AIS to verify and validate 100% observer
coverage on all transhipments as well as supporting strong penalties and
sanctions for violations;
•
Mandate authorised observer programmes to provide observers before any
boarding for a trip;
o
An approved independent two way communication satellite device; and
o
A waterproof personal lifesaving beacon
•
Mandate authorised observer programmes to develop and implement an
“Emergency Action Plan” (EAP) to accommodate any observer emergency
including interference or assault; and
•
Mandate recordkeeping and reporting requirements that compel all CCMs to
report all instances of violations against of observers as soon as possible to the
WCPFC Secretariat.
Pacific Bluefin Tuna
Technical reports of both the International Scientific Committee for Tuna and Tuna-like Species in the
North Pacific Ocean (ISC) and the IATTC indicate that the Pacific Bluefin tuna stock is in extremely
poor condition.  The ISC confirmed that overfishing is occurring, the stock is heavily overfished, and
its spawning stock biomass has declined by as much as 96%.14 This  is  a  clear  indicator  that  the
management measures taken both in the Western and Central Pacific and in the Eastern Pacific are
proving insufficient to conserve the biological integrity of this stock. The IATTC and WCPFC must
assume their share of responsibility.
The  last  assessment  confirms  that  the  stock  is  highly  depleted,  that  fishing  mortality  exceeds  all
reasonable proxies for Fmsy. The recovery of the stock may be further delayed if the current scenario of
low recruitment continues which is heavily reliant on a major adult cohort in the population. While
the WCPFC adopted conservation measures calling for reductions in catch for Pacific bluefin tuna of
<30 kg in size, conservation of spawning stocks is also needed.
WWF  maintains  deep  concerns  regarding  this  stock  with  an  aim  of  restoring  and  rebuilding  this
ecologically, sociologically, and economically important fishery resource.  The current science strongly
indicates that there is only one reproductive cohort that is reaching the end of its life.  Additionally,
about 90% of the stock fished is comprised of young fish that have not yet reproduced.  Thus, the
continued reproductive success of the entire stock depends on the reproductive success of a single
cohort, leaving the stock in a critical situation that may seriously jeopardize recruitment.
WWF encourages close monitoring of fisheries and catch as well as completion of a revised stock
assessment for Pacific bluefin in early 2016.  WWF urges both IATTC and WCPFC to adopt a long-
term Pacific bluefin tuna recovery plan targeting 20%SSBF=0, and harvest control rules that are well-
defined, pre-agreed, and contain mandatory actions for a determined course of management action in
response to changes in indicators of stock status with respect to reference points.
The WCPFC, consistent with the best scientific information, must act to ensure that fishing mortality
on  Pacific  bluefin  tuna  be  urgently  reduced,  especially  on  juveniles,  in  order  to  reduce  the  risk  of
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 12th Regular Session, Bali, Indonesia, 3-8 December 2015
8
recruitment  collapse  and  allow  spawning  stock  to  rebuild.  If  the  WCPFC  fails  to  adopt  sufficient
management measures at this meeting, it may be forced to consider a prohibition on continued fishing
of the stock in the near future.
WWF recommends that the WCPFC:
•
Adopt a long-term Pacific bluefin tuna recovery plan targeting at least 20%SSB0 by
2030; and
•
Implement a size limit for Pacific bluefin tuna of >30kg to conserve spawning
stock in addition to the current temporary management measure.
1 Clarke, Shelley C., et al. (2013). Population Trends in Pacific Oceanic Sharks and the Utility of Regulations on Shark Finning.
Conservation Biology, Volume 27, Issue , pages 197–209, February.
2 See Stevenson, C., et al. (2007). High apex predator biomass on remote Pacific islands. Coral Reefs 26: 47-51; See also Friedlander, A.M.
and DeMartini, E.E. (2002). Contrasts on density, size, and biomass of reef fishes between the northwestern and the main Hawaiian islands:
the effects of fishing down apex predators. Marine Ecology Progress Series 230: 253-264.
3 WCPFC (2014) Summary Report of the Eleventh Regular Session of the Western Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (Adopted version)
– 29 July 2015, WCPFC, Apia, Samoa, 1-5 December 2014. Attachment S. p.262.
4 Clarke, Shelley C. (2013). Towards an Integrated Shark Conservation and Management Measure for the Western and Central Pacific
Ocean. WCPFC-SC9-2013/ EB-WP-08. WCPFC-SC, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia, 6-14 August 2013.
5 Id at 24-27.
6 Into the deep: Implementing CITES measures for commercially-valuable sharks and manta rays. TRAFFIC Wildlife Trade Monitoring
Network.  Available from http://www.traffic.org/home/2013/7/30/new-study-gets-its-teeth-into-shark-trade-regulations.html.
7 Mundy-Taylor, V., et al. (2014). CITES Non-detriment Findings Guidance for Shark Species. A Framework to assist Authorities in
making Non-detriment Findings (NDFs) for species listed in CITES Appendix II. Report prepared for the Germany Federal Agency for
Nature Conservation (Bundesamt für Naturschutz, BfN).
8 WCPFC Scientific Committee (2009) Monitoring the Effectiveness of Conservation and Management Measures for Bycatch, EB-WP-09,
Port Vila, Vanuatu, 10-21 August 2009.
9 WCPFC  (2012) Performance Assessment of RFMO Bycatch Governance:  Criteria Suite Design and Results for Assessment of the
WCPFC, WCPFC8-2011-OP/02,  10 August 2012, WCPFC, Guam, USA, 26-30 March 2012.)
10 See e.g. Lewison, Rebecca L. et al. (2014). Global patterns of marine mammal, seabird, and sea turtle bycatch reveal taxa-specific and
cumulative megafauna hotspots. PNAS 2014 ; published ahead of print March 17, 2014, doi:10.1073/pnas.131896011, March; Wallace,
Bryan P. et al. (2013). Impacts of fisheries bycatch on marine turtle populations worldwide: toward conservation and research priorities.
Ecosphere 4:art40. http://dx.doi.org/10.1890/ES12-00388.1, March;  Shamblin B.M., et al. (2014) Geographic Patterns of Genetic Variation
in a Broadly Distributed Marine Vertebrate: New Insights into Loggerhead Turtle Stock Structure from Expanded Mitochondrial DNA
Sequences. PLoS ONE 9(1): e85956. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0085956. January.;  Beverly, Steve, and Mark Schreffler. (2012).
Preliminary comparison of fishing efficiency of circle hooks and Japan tuna hooks in the Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea-based longline
fishery. Unpublished. Available on request.;  WWF. (2011). Results of Testing Circle Hook in the Tuna Long Line Fisheries in the Offshore
Waters of Central and Southeast Vietnam, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Research Institute of Marine Fisheries.
Unpublished. Available on request.
11 Andraka, Sandra, et al. (2013) Circle hooks: Developing better fishing practices in the artisanal longline fisheries of the Eastern Pacific
Ocean. Biological Conservation, Issue 160, pages 214–224, March.
12 WCPFC Technical and Compliance Committee (2015) Independent Working Group – Regional Observer Programme (IWG-ROP)
Meeting Report, WCPFC-TCC11-2015-17, Attachment 5, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia, 23-29 September 2015.
13 WCPFC Technical and Compliance Committee (2015) Independent Working Group – Regional Observer Programme (IWG-ROP)
Meeting Report, WCPFC-TCC11-2015-17, Attachment 6, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia, 23-29 September 2015.
14 Yukio Takeuchi, et al., 2014, Updated future projections of Pacific bluefin tuna with draft results to answer the requests from
NC9.,ISC/14/PBFWG-1/10re.
© 1986 Panda Symbol WWF - World Wide Fund For Nature (Formerly World Wildlife Fund)
® “WWF” is a WWF Registered Trademark.
Our Smart Fishing Vision and Goals:
Vision: The world’s oceans are healthy, well-managed and full of life, providing valuable resources for the welfare
of humanity.
2020 Goals: The responsible management and trade of four key fishery populations results in recovering and
resilient marine eco-systems, improved livelihoods for coastal communities and strengthened food security for the
Planet.
For more information
Alfred “Bubba” Cook
WCP Tuna Program Manager
acook@wwf.panda.org
Tel: +64 4 499 2930
Mob: +64 27 833 0537
WWF Smart Fishing Initiative
Moenckebergstr. 27
20095 Hamburg
Tel. +49 40 530 200 310
www.panda.org/smartfishing
● POSITION
WWF.PANDA.ORG/SMARTFISHING
