 
 
COMMISSION 
FOURTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Manila, Philippines 
3 – 7 December 2017 
IPNLF Position Statement to WCPFC14   
WCPFC14-2017-OP12 
2 December 2017 
 
Submission by International Pole and Line Foundation (IPNLF) 
 
 
International Pole & Line Foundation
1 London Street, Reading, RG1 4QW, United states
Registered charity no. 1145586
info@ipnlf.org
www.ipnlf.org
IPNLF POSITION STATEMENT
14th Regular Session of the 
Western & Central Pacific Fisheries Commission
Manila, Philippines, 2-7 December 2017
The International Pole & Line Foundation (IPNLF) is an international charity
working to develop and demonstrate the value of one-by-one tuna fisheries. Its
role is two-fold: to promote the benefits of one-by-one tuna fisheries; and to
develop
these
fisheries
–
to
support
and
improve
their
viability
and
sustainability. We work across science, policy and the seafood sector to
improve
the
wellbeing
of
coastal
communities
who
are
committed
to
environmentally and socially responsible tuna fishing methods, such as pole-
and-line, troll, and handline. The Western and Central Pacific has strong
historical linkages to such fisheries, and many continue to play important roles
in
Indonesia,
Japan,
New Zealand,
the
Solomon
Islands,
Tahiti,
the
Philippines, among others.
An important part of our work involves connecting people and organisations
that want to support the sustainable development of one-by-one fisheries. Our
membership – which currently stands at 50 – includes a broad range of fishery
associations and businesses involved in the one-by-one tuna supply chain. Our
member one-by-one tuna fisheries active in the WCPFC Convention Area
include fishers from Indonesia, New Zealand, and the United States.
In Indonesia, IPNLF, together with our partner, Asosiasi Periknan Pole & Line 
Dan Handline Indonesia (AP2HI), and the Government of Indonesia, work to 
improve several aspects of the one-by-one fisheries. Drawing on our network of 
international experts, and working with AP2HI’s 27 member companies and 
their fishers, our goal is to improve the sustainability, quality and viability of 
pole-and-line and handline tuna catches throughout Indonesia. IPNLF and 
AP2HI are also leading Fishery Improvement Projects (FIPs) for 
International Pole & Line Foundation
1 London Street, Reading, RG1 4QW, United states
Registered charity no. 1145586
info@ipnlf.org
www.ipnlf.org
Indonesian one-by-one tuna fisheries to meet international sustainability
standards.
At this year’s Commission meeting, IPNLF encourages members, cooperating
non-members and participating territories (CCMs collectively) to adopt a
number of conservation and management measures (CMMs) that, together, will
strengthen the framework for sustainable tuna fisheries in the Western and
Central Pacific Ocean. Specifically, we urge progress in the following areas:
• Continue progress on the adoption of harvest strategies for all major
stocks in line with the proposed timeline that aim to avoid adverse impacts
on the stocks while also recognizing the social and economic dependence of
coastal communities that rely on the fisheries.
• Adopt
an
enforceable
and
effective
bridging
measure
for
the
management of tropical tunas that recognizes the important social and
economic contributions of one-by-one tuna fisheries to coastal communities
throughout the Convention Area..
• Improve the monitoring and regulation of purse seine supply vessels
and other undermanaged fishing gears that contribute to overall fishing
effort, including the impacts associated with drifting fish aggregating devices
(dFADs).
• Reduce marine pollution, including of plastics and drifting FADs, which
damage
coastal
habitats
by
adhering
to
marine
debris
reporting
requirements, recovering dFADs at sea, and requiring fully biodegradable
materials in dFAD construction.
• Adopt measures that will effectively reduce bycatch and protect
endangered, threatened, or protected species, including sharks, seabirds,
cetaceans, and turtles.
• Improve observer safety and increase longline observer coverage,
including via electronic monitoring, to better estimate bycatch and improve
monitoring of the fishery.
• Increase the transparency of the WCPFC compliance process by
allowing accredited observers to participate in the process.
International Pole & Line Foundation
1 London Street, Reading, RG1 4QW, United states
Registered charity no. 1145586
info@ipnlf.org
www.ipnlf.org
The proposals on tropical tunas and south Pacific albacore tuna
are
particularly important this year in the face of increasing fishing effort and stock
status projections. Progress in these areas is needed, as more sustainable
management frameworks will benefit every CCM, bring positive long-term
returns to fishing communities, and minimise the risk of future fisheries
collapse.
The Western and Central Pacific Ocean is home to the world’s largest tuna
fishery, two of the world’s largest pole-and-line fisheries (Indonesia and Japan),
and
many
troll
and
handline
fisheries
supporting
coastal
communities
throughout the region. IPNLF would like to see management measures
adopted that safeguard tuna stocks and ecosystems so that one-by-one
fisheries, and the communities that depend on them, can flourish. We will
continue to work with our members to strive for the highest environmental and
social standards, which will reinforce the good work of the Commission
Troll tuna fishery of New Zealand © New Zealand Tuna Management 
Association
International Pole & Line Foundation
1 London Street, Reading, RG1 4QW, United states
Registered charity no. 1145586
info@ipnlf.org
www.ipnlf.org
ABOUT IPNLF
The International Pole & Line Foundation (IPNLF) works to develop, support 
and promote socially and environmentally responsible pole-and-line and 
handline tuna fisheries around the world. IPNLF’s ambition is to contribute to 
thriving coastal fisheries, including the people, communities, businesses and 
seas connected with them. As a hub for sustainably-minded organisations, we 
use the influence of the market to forge change through practical fishery 
projects and stakeholder cooperation. IPNLF membership is open to 
organisations involved in the one-by-one tuna supply chain. Allied with our 
Members, IPNLF demonstrates the value of one-by-one caught tuna to 
consumers, policymakers and throughout the supply chain. We work across 
science, policy and the seafood sector, using an evidence-based, solutions-
focused approach with guidance from our Scientific & Technical Advisory 
Committee and Board of Trustees.
IPNLF was officially registered in the United Kingdom in 2012 (Charity 
1145586), with branch offices in London and the Maldives, and a staff presence 
in the US, South Africa, France, and Indonesia.
Contact: Adam Baske,  IPNLF Director, Policy and Outreach, 
adam.baske@ipnlf.org
Keep informed about the latest developments in one-by-one tuna fisheries 
through our website and by connecting with us on Facebook, Twitter and 
LinkedIn.
