 
SIXTH REGULAR SESSION 
Papeete, Tahiti, French Polynesia 
7-11 December 2009 
OPENING STATEMENT 
WCPFC6-2009/OP04 
7 December 2009 
Submitted by the Pew Environment Group 
 
 
Disclaimer 
 
The papers submitted by NGOs, and the views expressed therein, are being distributed solely in 
accordance with Rule 36(5) of the Commission’s Rules of Procedure and do not imply endorsement of 
such views by the Commission or members of the Commission. 
 
 
 
Pew Environment Group 
Opening Statement at the 6th Regular Session of 
The Western Pacific Fisheries Commission 
 
On behalf of the Pew Environment Group, I want to thank the Western Central Pacific Fisheries 
Commission for inviting us to attend this meeting as an observer and allowing us the opportunity 
to discuss ways to improve the conservation status of Pacific sharks, and other species under the 
responsibility of the WCPFC.   
 
As top predators in the ocean, sharks play a critical role in keeping marine ecosystems healthy 
and the food web in balance. Yet up to 73 million sharks are killed annually for the shark fin 
market and scientists have shown that many shark populations are threatened with extinction.  
Most sharks are slow growing, mature late, and produce few young, making them especially 
vulnerable to overfishing and slow to recover once depleted.  Yet there are no limits to the 
number of sharks taken from the world’s oceans.  
 
The WCPFC has taken initial action to conserve Pacific sharks, including Conservation and 
Management Measure (CMM) 2008-06, which calls on all CCMs to: implement the UN’s 
International Plan of Action for Sharks (IPOA), adhere to a 5% fin-to-carcass weight ratio for 
sharks, and adopt measures to minimize waste from shark catches and encourage the live release 
of shark bycatch.  The CMM also asks the Scientific Committee to provide preliminary advice 
on the stock status of key shark species and propose a research plan for the assessment of the 
status of these stocks in 2010.  And finally, a Pacific Islands Regional Plan of Action for Sharks 
(PI-RPOA) was issued in October 2009.  These are all good first steps, but stronger, more 
meaningful conservation measures are needed now by WCPFC and its member countries to 
ensure targeted fishing as well as bycatch won’t deplete shark species or drive them toward 
extinction. 
 
As sharks are among the most biologically vulnerable fish in the ocean and little is known about 
their population status, the Pew Environment Group believes that shark fishing should not occur 
in the absence of scientific population assessments and precautionary management plans.  These 
measures would help ensure sustainable populations for the future.  Furthermore, as sharks are 
often caught as bycatch, wire leaders should be prohibited and other bycatch minimization 
measures should be implemented.   
 
At this 6th Session of WCPFC, the Pew Environment Group urges you to take strong action on 
sharks by adopting a number of key conservation measures that will help protect shark 
populations in the Pacific Ocean.  Specifically, we urge you to support the following measures 
that will help ensure the conservation of shark populations under WCPFC’s management 
purview:    
 
Pew Environment Group 
December 7, 2009 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
 Prohibit the use of wire leaders to reduce bycatch and encourage the live release of 
sharks.   
 
 Include silky sharks among the key shark species identified in CMM 2008-06, and also 
include other species at high risk of overexploitation, as identified through Ecological 
Risk Assessments.  For example, great, scalloped, and smooth hammerheads, sandbar, 
porbeagle and dusky sharks should be included with the silky shark immediately as key 
shark species for the CMM. 
 
 Prohibit the removal of shark fins at sea by requiring that fins be naturally attached on 
landing.  This will help ward against the practice of shark finning and facilitate collection 
of species-specific catch data.    
 
 Prohibit the retention and landing of exceptionally biologically vulnerable sharks such as 
the bigeye thresher, as adopted by ICCAT this year. 
 
 Set catch limits and other management measures for vulnerable shark species lacking 
stock assessments based on Ecological Risk Assessments. 
 
 Make all portions of CMM 2008-06 mandatory. 
 
 Take concrete steps to adhere to the commitments made at the Joint Tuna RFMO meeting 
in San Sebastian to establish precautionary, science based conservation and management 
measures for sharks, including:  prohibit the retention of particularly vulnerable shark 
species based on advice from scientists and experts; establish precautionary fishing 
controls for shark species for which there is no scientific advice; and improve the 
provision of data on sharks in all fisheries and by all gears. 
 
 
Thank you. 
 
Julie Arner 
Manager, Global Shark Conservation  
Pew Environment Group 
jarner@pewtrusts.org 
 
