 
 
 
WCPFC10 
Tenth Regular Session 
2nd December – 6th December 2013 
Cairns, AUSTRALIA 
PEW BRIEFING TO THE 10TH REGULAR SESSION OF THE WCPFC 
WCPFC10-2013-OP03 
22 November 2013 
 
Recommendations to the 10th Regular 
Session of the Western and Central 
Pacific Fisheries Commission
2-6 December, 2013, Cairns, Australia
A brief from
Nov 2013
The Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) aims to ensure the long-term conservation 
and sustainable use of the fish stocks, including tuna and sharks, in the western and central Pacific Ocean. The 
WCPFC has a unique and important responsibility as custodian of the world’s largest tuna fishery in an area 
covering 20 percent of the Earth’s surface. 
Sustaining healthy fisheries in this region requires strong conservation and management actions through joint 
commitments and strict compliance. Unfortunately, the Commission’s Members, Cooperating Non-members, 
and Participating Territories, known collectively as CCMs, have been unable to take the actions needed to ensure 
the sustainability of highly migratory fish populations.
This year’s Commission meeting is critical to the future of bigeye and Pacific bluefin tuna, as well as many shark 
species. 
The Pew Charitable Trusts calls on governments involved in the WCPFC to agree to take the following critical 
actions:
 • End overfishing in tuna fisheries and strengthen management to ensure sustainability.
 • Strengthen controls so as to end illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing.
 • Adopt conservation and management measures to protect sharks.
2
Recommendations
End overfishing in tuna fisheries and strengthen management to ensure 
sustainability
This year, the WCPFC must demonstrate that it can manage the world’s largest tuna fishery responsibly by 
implementing precautionary reference points, acting to end overfishing of bigeye tuna, and moving to rebuild the 
severely depleted Pacific bluefin population. 
Reference points
The 2012 and 2013 Management Objectives Workshops provided CCMs with the information needed to 
implement the Convention requirement to determine appropriate reference points and conservation actions 
for these species of tuna.1 This is an important step toward a more precautionary, science-based management 
system that will better protect the ecosystem and fisheries from future declines. 
 • The WCPFC should adopt interim target and limit reference points for skipjack, albacore, yellowfin, bluefin, 
and bigeye tuna. 
 • CCMs also should continue discussions on harvest-control rules that ensure that limit reference points are 
not exceeded and that targets achieve the desired outcomes. 
© Masa Ushioda / SeaPics.com
Skipjack tuna.
3
Tropical tuna measure: Ending overfishing of bigeye tuna
Negotiations on the new tropical tuna Conservation and 
Management Measure (CMM) have failed to adhere to the 
scientific advice, as each party to the talks worked to minimize the 
impact on its fishing operations. This has led to an overly complex 
measure that relies on management tools that have already proved 
ineffective for this fishery and would be difficult to enforce. 
 • The Commission must commit to ending overfishing of bigeye 
tuna by 2018 by adopting a CMM for tropical tuna that freezes 
fishing capacity, caps longline catch, and limits the amount of 
fishing by purse-seiners on fish aggregating devices (FADs) 
to sustainable levels consistent with the advice from the 
Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC).
 • The CMM must be reviewed and updated next year based 
on the results of the 2014 stock assessments of bigeye and 
yellowfin tuna.
The Commission must 
commit to ending 
overfishing of bigeye 
tuna by 2018.
Alex Hofford/Greenpeace via Marine Photobank
A school of tuna swims in a purse-seine net in Papua New Guinea waters.
4
In addition, CCMs fishing with FADs should be required to submit management plans for these devices, which 
should include information on the numbers deployed, recovered, and lost, as well as FAD tracking data. This 
data would give the Scientific Committee more information on the extent of FAD use, the potential effects on the 
ecosystem tied to their uncontrolled proliferation, and the scope of this fishery’s contribution to marine debris. It 
also would provide greater insight into how FAD use contributes to IUU fishing. 
To ensure that the effectiveness of the new CMM can be measured, all CCMs should provide all relevant data 
on their fisheries to the Commission. Without this, critical information on catch rates, spatial patterns, and the 
numbers of fishing vessels operating in the Convention Area cannot be confirmed. Observer coverage can provide 
such data, and all CCMs should endeavor to increase observer coverage to at least 20 percent. Given the high 
impact that large-scale freezer longliners have on target, associated, and dependent species, the WCPFC should 
mandate 100 percent observer coverage on these vessels.
Pacific bluefin tuna
Based on the International Scientific Committee’s (ISC) latest stock assessment, the Pacific bluefin population is 
at just 3.6 percent of its original size, and both the ISC and the WCPFC Scientific Committee have recommended 
that fishing mortality be reduced from recent levels to limit the risk of further population declines. At its 2013 
meeting, however, the Commission’s Northern Committee recommended a measure that would allow overall 
catch to rise above levels seen in the last two years. In doing so, the Northern Committee has again agreed to 
management measures that are inadequate to protect this severely depleted species. Therefore, the WCPFC 
should recommend that the Northern Committee develop a rebuilding plan for Pacific bluefin tuna for adoption 
by the 11th Regular Session of the WCPFC that includes catch limits that would return the population to 25 
percent SSBrecent, F=0 (25 percent of the original population size) within the next 10 years. If the WCPFC 
again fails to adopt and implement appropriate management measures, fishing for Pacific bluefin tuna should be 
suspended until such precautionary, science-based measures are put in place.
Strengthen controls against IUU fishing
IUU fishing remains a threat in the WCPFC Convention Area. To enhance compliance with CMMs, the 
Commission should require that vessels fishing in its waters have mandatory, unique, and permanent 
identification numbers. The WCPFC also should adopt a new measure on port State controls.
The International Maritime Organization (IMO) number is an essential element of any system to ensure 
compliance with fisheries laws and to aid safety and security at sea.2 The WCPFC should improve the 
transparency of fishing vessels’ activities by requiring that those licensed to fish in the Convention Area have 
an IMO number. 
The Commission also should:
 • Require members to submit the IMO number of any vessel authorized to fish in the Convention Area that 
already has such a number, and mandate that the number be included in the Commission Record of Fishing 
Vessels.
 • Require that all vessels3 authorized to fish in the WCPFC Convention Area have an IMO number by Jan. 1, 
2015, and that this number be reported in all records and relevant communications involving these vessels. 
The number should be permanently marked in a visible place on the vessel’s hull.
5
Courtesy of Australian Fisheries Management Authority
Vessel crew paints a new name on the hull at sea to avoid enforcement for illegal fishing crimes committed under prior name.
In addition, port State measures (PSMs) are cost-effective 
tools to prevent fish caught illegally from entering the market. 
WCPFC’s Performance Review recommended adoption of PSMs, 
warning that the Commission is lagging behind other regional 
fisheries management organizations in doing so.4 The WCPFC 
should initiate development of a regional scheme of PSMs, 
adopting at this meeting minimum standards for port inspections 
and providing adequate support to developing States for 
implementation.
High seas transshipment continues to be used in the WCPFC 
Convention Area as a way to avoid proper catch reporting and to 
launder IUU catch. The WCPFC should introduce a ban on high 
seas transshipment until it can be ensured that transshipment 
operations cannot assist IUU fishing. This would require having a 
robust monitoring system in place that includes full transparency, 
requiring observers on board the offloading and receiving vessels 
and complete oversight by the Commission of all transshipment 
operations in the Convention Area.
The WCPFC 
should improve the 
transparency of fishing 
vessels’ activities by 
requiring that those 
licensed to fish in the 
Convention Area have 
an IMO number.
6
Silky shark (Carcharhinus falciformis).
Adopt CMMs to protect sharks
The latest stock assessment shows that the silky shark 
(Carcharhinus falciformis), a low-productivity species, is in 
an overfished state in the WCPFC Convention Area and that 
overfishing continues.5 Given this evidence, the WCPFC should 
follow the best practice established by the Commission when it 
prohibited the retention of oceanic whitetip sharks. It is essential 
that the WCPFC prohibit the retention on board, transshipment, 
storage, and landing of silky sharks this year.
This will be most effective in combination with improved shark 
bycatch-mitigation measures to prevent initial catch of this and 
other vulnerable shark species. Among the most effective are 
the use of non-entangling FADs6 and controls on the use of wire 
leaders,7 shark lines, and shark bait.8 We recommend that the 
WCPFC mandate the use of non-entangling FADs and prohibit the 
use of wire leaders, shark lines, and shark bait.
It is essential that the 
WCPFC prohibit the 
retention on board, 
transshipment, storage, 
and landing of silky 
sharks this year.
Jim Abernethy
7
Angelo O’Connor Villagomez
A garbage can full of shark fins—primarily from oceanic whitetip, blue, silky, and mako sharks—that were confiscated in the Marshall Islands. 
The law there requires that seized fins be burned or disposed of at sea.
Action is also needed on the management of blue sharks (Prionace 
glauca), given the high levels of catch in the WCPFC Convention 
Area—about 40,000 tonnes annually over the last decade—and 
uncertainty on the status of the stock.9 Given the WCPFC Scientific 
Committee’s advice to follow the precautionary approach10 in 
setting management measures while stock assessment work 
continues, blue shark catch levels should be limited at this year’s 
WCPFC meeting to recent year averages.
This year’s Commission 
meeting is critical to 
the future of bigeye and 
Pacific bluefin tuna, 
as well as many shark 
species.
8
Contact: Amanda Nickson 
Phone: 202-674-9829 
Email: anickson@pewtrusts.org
Facebook: facebook.com/pewenvironmentgroup 
Twitter: twitter.com/pewenvironment or @pewenvironment 
YouTube: youtube.com/user/pew
For further information, please visit: 
pewenvironment.org/ip
The Pew Charitable Trusts is driven by the power of knowledge to solve today’s most challenging problems. Pew applies a rigorous, analytical 
approach to improve public policy, inform the public, and stimulate civic life.
Endnotes
1. 
Article 6 of the Convention on the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific 
Ocean states, “In applying the precautionary approach, the members of the Commission shall: (a) apply the guidelines set out in Annex II 
of the Agreement … and determine, on the basis of the best scientific information available, stock-specific reference points and the action 
to be taken if they are exceeded.” http://www.wcpfc.int/system/files/text.pdf.
2. See The Pew Charitable Trusts, “Illegal Fishing, Your Number’s Up!” fact sheet (2013), http://www.pewenvironment.org/news-room/fact-
sheets/illegal-fishing-your-numbers-up-85899498000.
3. Vessels should include, but not be limited to, those 24 meters long or greater, those of 100 or more  gross tons, and those operating 
outside their flag States’ exclusive economic zone.
4. Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission, WCPFC Performance Review Recommendations_rev1_, sec. 6.2, 44, http://www.wcpfc.
int/node/3334. The performance review recommended that “in considering Port State Measures, the Commission should take into 
account minimum standards in the PSMA, measures and practices of other RFMOs in implementing such standards and developments in 
the broader system of Port controls.” Ibid., sec. 3.2.5, 1.
5. Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission, Summary Report: Scientific Committee, Ninth Regular Session, para. 228 (2013),  
http://www.wcpfc.int/meetings/9th-regular-session-scientific-committee.
6. John David Filmalter, et al., “Looking Behind the Curtain: Quantifying Massive Shark Mortality in Fish Aggregating Devices,” Frontiers in 
Ecology and the Environment 11 (2013): 291–296, http://dx.doi.org/10.1890/130045.
7. 
Peter Ward, et al., “Large-Scale Experiment Shows That Nylon Leaders Reduce Shark Bycatch and Benefit Pelagic Longline Fishers,” 
Fisheries Research 90 (2008): 100–108.
8. Don Bromhead, Joel Rice, and Shelton Harley, Analyses of the Potential Influence of Four Gear Factors (Leader Type, Hook Type, ‘Shark’ Lines 
and Bait Type) on Shark Catch Rates in WCPO Tuna Longline Fisheries, Secretariat of the Pacific Community, WCPFC-SC9-2013/EB-WP-02 
rev. 1 (July 22, 2013), http://www.wcpfc.int/system/files/EB-WP-02-Shark-mitigation-Rev1.pdf.
9. Joel Rice, et al., Stock Assessment of Blue Shark in the North Pacific Ocean Using Stock Synthesis, WCPFC-SC9-2013/SA-WP-02 (July 19, 
2013), http://www.wcpfc.int/node/3668.
10. Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission, Summary Report, para. 273.
