 
 
COMMISSION 
THIRTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Denarau Island, Fiji 
5 – 9 December, 2016 
Recommendations to WCPFC13 
WCPFC13-2016-OP08 
21 November 2016 
 
 
Paper submitted by International Game Fishing Association 
 
 
  
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Game Fish Association 
Fishing Hall of Fame & Museum 
300 Gulf Stream Way, Dania Beach, Florida, 33004 U.S.A. 
Phone:  (954) 927-2628    Fax: (954) 924-4299  Museum Fax (954) 924-4220 
 
 
Recommendations to the 13th Regular Session of the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission 
 
The International Game Fish Association (IGFA) is a non-profit organization that represents recreational anglers 
throughout the world. IGFA was established in 1939, has active members in over 100 countries, is the 
governing body for international recreational fishing, and provides rules for ethical angling practices. Many of 
IGFA’s members target the highly migratory species managed by WCPFC, especially marlin, sailfish and 
spearfish (i.e., billfish) which are primarily caught and released.  
 
IGFA has great concern about how highly migratory species are being managed on a global level for 
recreational anglers. The lack of data and accurate reporting on billfish catch is of particular concern. As an 
organization that is committed to the conservation of game fishes, IGFA has deployed over 250 pop-up satellite 
archival tags in marlin around the world in the past three years, many of which have been in waters under this 
organization’s purview. The information gained from this exercise is available to your scientific committee.   
 
 
Billfish 
 
Although primarily a commercial bycatch species, billfish are highly sought after recreational species 
that are primarily caught and released.  We urge the WCPFC to set a target reference rate above BMSY 
for recreational anglers. 
 
The WCNPO stock of striped marlin is overfished and experiencing overfishing. Reducing fishing 
mortality would likely increase spawning stock biomass and may improve the chances of higher 
recruitment. We recommend fishing at a constant catch of 2,500 mt that would lead to potential 
increases in spawning biomass of 133% to 223% by 2017. 
 
No formal stock assessments exist for sailfish and black marlin.  Better data collection is necessary for 
these species so that their true abundance can be accurately estimated.  
 
IGFA further recommends implementing a prohibition on Pacific billfish entering into international 
trade. Similar legislation has recently been passed, at the request of IGFA, in the United States that 
now bans importation of marlin, sailfish and spearfish into the continental United States.  
 
We also recommend all countries be required to report dead discards and use circle hooks in their 
longline fisheries.  
 
Bluefin Tuna 
The 2016 stock assessment indicates that Pacific Bluefin tuna have been reduced to less than 3% of their virgin 
biomass.  Yet, management measure recommended by the Northern Committee fail to end overfishing giving 
the stock less than a 1% chance or recovering under this management regime.  As such, these actions are 
insufficient to address the status of Pacific bluefin tuna and will result in the stock remaining in a severely 
depleted condition for at least another decade.   The IGFA recommends a minimum of a one year moratorium 
on commercial harvest, subject to extension, until the Commission develops meaningful management 
measures that will immediately end overfishing and begin rebuilding the stock to a healthy level in reasonable 
amount of time.  IGFA recommends implementing target and limit reference points that increases spawning 
stock biomass to 20% of virgin biomass in eight years and to 40% of virgin biomass by 2030.   
 
 
 The International Game Fish Association is a not-for-profit organization committed to the conservation of game fish and the 
promotion of responsible, ethical angling practices through science, education, rule making and record keeping.  
Email:  HQ@igfa.org   Website: www.igfa.org 
 
 
 
Page 2 
 
 
FADs 
 
The increasing use of FADs in tuna purse seine fisheries has become a global issue. IGFA urges the 
Commission to enact measures to reduce the harvest of juvenile bigeye and yellowfin tuna FAD associated 
purse seine fisheries.  IGFA also recommends enhanced data collection on FAD fisheries, including unique 
coding of individual FADs. 
 
IUU 
 
Transhipment at sea facilitates IUU fishing and the IGFA recommends that the WCPFC ban all forms of 
transhipment at sea until it can be demonstrated that such operations are not contributing to IUU fishing. 
Sharks 
 
IGFA recommends the Commission adopt a complete prohibition of wire traces in longline fisheries to 
reduce the catch of imperilled shark species 
General 
 
Recreational angling is an established and important economic entity in developed countries and a 
growing one in many developing nations.  As such we wish that WCPFC recognize both its relevance and 
that it may necessitate alternate management objectives than those used in commercial fisheries. IGFA 
kindly offers its consultation to WCPFC on recreational fisheries issues. 
 
 
Managing fisheries on the basis of MSY is an excessively risk-prone approach. As such, we suggest that 
WCPFC adopt a target objective above BMSY to compensate for biological, environmental and data 
uncertainties.   Many recreational fisheries are catch and release in nature, where anglers prefer to catch 
more and bigger fish than to necessarily harvest fish.  In addition to its inherent uncertainty, managing 
stocks on the level of MSY not only reduces the abundance of fish but also their average size. Maintaining 
stocks at higher abundances benefits recreational anglers that release their fish and also contributes to 
the substantial economic value of these fisheries.  We feel this is especially true with bycatch species such 
as marlin and sailfish that have little commercial value but great economic value to recreational anglers.   
 
 
 
 
