1 
 
 
COMMISSION 
 ELEVENTH REGULAR SESSION  
Faleata Sports Complex, Apia, SAMOA  
1 - 5 December 2014 
ISSF POSITION STATEMENT  
WCPFC11-2014-OP01 
31 October 2014 
 
Paper by International Seafood Sustainability Foundation (ISSF) 
 
	  
1	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
ISSF	  POSITION	  STATEMENT	  
Presented	  during	  the	  11th	  Regular	  Session	  	  
of	  the	  Western	  and	  Central	  Pacific	  Fisheries	  
Commission	  in	  Apia,	  Samoa,	  1–	  5	  December	  2014
	  
For	  further	  information	  please	  visit	  http://www.ISS-­‐FOUNDATION.org	  
	  
• 
CMM	  2013-­‐01,	  bigeye	  and	  skipjack	  tuna.	  	  The	  analyses	  presented	  at	  SC10	  corroborate	  the	  fact	  
that	  CMMs	  adopted	  by	  WCPFC	  to	  end	  the	  overfishing	  of	  bigeye	  have	  been	  ineffective.	  Overfishing	  
continues	  and	  the	  stock	  is	  now	  below	  the	  Limit	  Reference	  Point	  adopted	  by	  the	  Commission.	  	  	  
The	  purse	  seine	  fishery	  continues	  to	  increase,	  with	  record	  catches	  in	  2013,	  when	  the	  bigeye	  
catch	  by	  this	  gear	  was	  clearly	  the	  highest	  ever.	  In	  addition,	  the	  longline	  fishery	  has	  a	  similar	  
impact	  on	  the	  reproductive	  capacity	  of	  the	  stock	  as	  the	  purse	  seine	  fishery	  does.	  Overall,	  fishing	  
mortality	  on	  the	  stock	  needs	  to	  be	  reduced	  by	  36%	  in	  order	  to	  end	  overfishing.	  
	  
CMM-­‐2013-­‐01	  is	  overly	  complex	  and	  has	  too	  many	  exemptions	  and	  optional	  clauses,	  which	  
render	  it	  ineffective	  and	  difficult	  to	  enforce.	  The	  WCPFC	  could	  consider	  adding	  other	  
incremental	  measures	  to	  the	  CMM	  (such	  as	  extending	  the	  FAD	  closure	  period,	  limiting	  the	  
number	  of	  FAD	  sets	  made	  each	  year	  or	  the	  number	  of	  FADs	  that	  each	  vessel	  uses),	  but	  this	  is	  
what	  has	  been	  done	  since	  2009	  and	  it	  is	  clearly	  not	  effective.	  ISSF	  urges	  the	  WCPFC	  to	  
eliminate	  the	  exemptions	  in	  the	  CMM	  and	  to	  adopt	  management	  measures	  that	  are	  
effective	  and	  easier	  to	  enforce,	  such	  as	  a	  total	  fishery	  closure	  (potentially	  with	  two	  
closure	  periods)	  or	  a	  reduction	  in	  fishing	  effort,	  to	  meet	  the	  objective	  of	  ending	  the	  
overfishing	  of	  the	  bigeye	  stock.	  	  
	  
Regarding	  skipjack	  tuna,	  the	  stock	  is	  within	  the	  range	  of	  the	  candidate	  Target	  Reference	  Points	  
(TRP)	  being	  considered	  by	  WCPFC	  and	  SC10	  recommended	  that	  fishing	  mortality	  on	  the	  stock	  
not	  be	  allowed	  to	  increase	  from	  its	  current	  level.	  ISSF	  urges	  WCPFC	  to	  limit	  fishing	  effort	  (fishing	  
days)	  in	  the	  purse	  seine	  fishery	  to	  a	  lower	  level	  that	  will	  maintain	  skipjack	  within	  the	  range	  of	  
candidate	  TRPs	  and	  significantly	  reduce	  the	  catch	  of	  bigeye.	  	  	  
	  
• 
Harvest	  Control	  Rules	  (HCRs)	  and	  Reference	  Points.	  HCRs	  are	  a	  set	  of	  well-­‐defined	  
management	  actions	  to	  be	  taken	  in	  response	  to	  changes	  in	  stock	  status	  with	  respect	  to	  target	  
and	  limit	  reference	  points.	  ISSF	  endorses	  the	  application	  of	  the	  Precautionary	  Approach	  using	  
clear	  target	  and	  limit	  reference	  points	  and	  HCRs,	  as	  called	  for	  by	  the	  UN	  Fish	  Stocks	  Agreement	  
and	  by	  some	  RFMO	  Conventions.	  	  
	  
In	  2012,	  the	  WCPFC	  adopted	  limit	  reference	  points	  for	  skipjack,	  bigeye,	  yellowfin	  and	  South	  
Pacific	  albacore.	  This	  was	  an	  important	  first	  step.	  	  Now	  the	  WCPFC	  needs	  to	  adopt	  harvest	  
strategies,	  including	  target	  reference	  points	  and	  harvest	  control	  rules	  for	  these	  same	  stocks.	  
ISSF	  looks	  forward	  to	  substantial	  progress	  on	  adoption	  of	  target	  reference	  points	  and	  HCRs	  
for	  skipjack	  at	  WCPFC11	  through	  the	  adoption	  of	  the	  proposed	  work	  plan	  for	  the	  
development	  and	  implementation	  of	  target	  reference	  points	  and	  HCRs.	  	  
	  
• 
Compliance	  and	  Data	  Gaps.	  	  ISSF	  notes	  with	  concern	  the	  SC10	  information	  about	  the	  lack	  of	  
operational	  data	  for	  longline	  fleets	  in	  the	  high	  seas,	  which	  affected	  the	  quality	  of	  the	  bigeye	  
	  
2	  
assessment	  reported	  at	  SC10.	  	  ISSF	  strongly	  urges	  all	  CCMs	  to	  meet	  their	  obligations	  regarding	  
data	  submissions	  and	  provide	  these	  operational	  data	  to	  the	  SPC	  by	  the	  agreed	  deadlines	  and	  
in	  the	  correct	  formats.	  	  ISSF	  further	  urges	  the	  Commission	  to	  consider	  appropriate	  
responses	  to	  promote	  compliance	  by	  those	  CCMs	  who	  have	  not	  yet	  provided	  operational	  
catch	  and	  effort	  data.	  
	  
While	  there	  were	  important	  strides	  in	  2013,	  ISSF	  continues	  to	  be	  concerned	  with	  the	  lack	  of	  
transparency	  in	  the	  WCPFC	  Compliance	  Monitoring	  Scheme	  (CMS).	  	  In	  contrast	  to	  the	  other	  four	  
tuna	  RFMOs,	  observers	  are	  not	  allowed	  in	  the	  CMS	  working	  group	  meetings	  and	  the	  responses	  of	  
members	  to	  identified	  non-­‐compliance	  are	  not	  released	  publically.	  	  Member	  reports	  on	  the	  
implementation	  of	  WCPFC	  measures,	  known	  as	  Part	  II	  reports,	  are	  also	  confidential.	  	  ISSF	  urges	  
the	  Commission	  to	  endorse	  TCC10’s	  recommendation	  to	  amend	  CMM	  2013-­‐02	  to	  reform	  its	  
CMS	  process	  so	  that	  accredited	  observers	  may	  attend	  the	  working	  group	  meetings	  and	  
information	  on	  how	  CCM’s	  respond	  to	  and	  plan	  to	  address	  the	  areas	  of	  identified	  non-­‐
compliance	  be	  made	  public.	  	  ISSF	  also	  supports	  the	  development	  of	  a	  scheme	  of	  responses	  to	  
non-­‐compliance	  by	  the	  Commission	  as	  soon	  as	  possible.	  	  	  
	  
• 
Fish	   Aggregating	   Device	   (FAD)	   Management.	   Setting	   on	   FADs	   accounts	   for	   nearly	   40%	   of	  
global	  tuna	  catches	  and	  50%	  of	  global	  skipjack	  catches.	  	  FADs	  are	  one	  of	  the	  most	  important	  
fishing	  methods	  for	  tropical	  tunas.	  	  However,	  there	  are	  huge	  gaps	  in	  all	  T-­‐RFMOs	  regarding	  the	  
number	  of	  FADs	  being	  used	  and	  on	  details	  of	  fishing	  operations	  on	  individual	  FADs.	  	  Observer	  
programs	  can	  be	  used	  to	  collect	  much	  -­‐-­‐	  but	  not	  all-­‐-­‐	  of	  the	  information	  needed	  to	  appropriately	  
monitor	  FADs,	  as	  shown	  in	  WCPFC-­‐SC10-­‐2014/ST-­‐IP-­‐09.	  	  	  The	  WCPFC	  has	  adopted	  Minimum	  
Standard	  Data	  Fields	  for	  observers	  that	  contain	  much	  of	  this	  information.	  	  However,	  there	  are	  
some	  types	  of	  information	  that	  an	  observer	  is	  unlikely	  or	  unable	  to	  collect,	  such	  as	  FAD	  markings	  
or	   details	   on	   the	   FAD	   design.	   This	   is	   information	   that	   vessel	   captains	   can	   easily	   collect,	   but	  
observers	  cannot	  do	  so	  routinely.	  
	  
ISSF	  urges	  the	  WCPFC	  to	  take	  two	  actions	  this	  year:	  (1)	  ensure	  that	  the	  regional	  observer	  
program	  routinely	  collects	  the	  FAD	  data	  in	  the	  WCPFC	  Minimum	  Standard	  Fields	  and	  (2)	  
expand	  the	  information	  required	  from	  vessels	  to	  include	  data	  on	  FAD	  deployments,	  designs,	  
equipment	  and	  identification	  marks.	  	  
	  
ISSF	  strongly	  supports	  the	  SC10	  and	  TCC10	  recommendations	  for	  the	  creation	  of	  a	  Working	  
Group	  on	  FAD	  management.	  ISSF	  urges	  the	  Working	  Group	  to	  adopt	  Terms	  of	  Reference	  that	  
address	  (i)	  FAD	  marking,	  and	  identification,	  and	  use	  of	  electronic	  signatures;	  and,	  (ii)	  FAD	  
monitoring,	  tracking	  and	  control.	  	  
	  
• 
Transparency	  in	  Access,	  Joint	  Venture	  and	  Chartering	  Arrangements.	  	  ISSF	  recognizes	  the	  
importance	  of	  access	  and	  chartering	  or	  joint	  venture	  arrangements	  to	  the	  development	  
aspirations	  of	  developing	  States,	  in	  particular	  small	  island	  developing	  States.	  	  It	  is	  also	  equally	  
important	  for	  accurate	  stock	  assessments	  and	  effective	  compliance	  and	  enforcement	  that	  there	  
is	  clarity	  regarding	  catch	  attribution	  and	  the	  responsible	  party	  for	  MCS	  regarding	  vessels	  under	  
chartering	  or	  access	  arrangements.	  ISSF	  urges	  the	  WCPFC	  to	  adopt	  measures	  to	  promote	  
transparency	  in	  access	  agreements	  and	  chartering	  or	  joint	  venture	  arrangements	  that	  are	  
similar	  to	  existing	  IOTC	  and	  ICCAT	  measures.	  
	  
• 
Sharks.	  	  SC10	  recommended	  that	  WCPFC11	  consider	  a	  number	  of	  longline	  shark	  mitigation	  
methods	  (WCPFC-­‐SC10-­‐EB-­‐WP-­‐01).	  ISSF	  notes	  that	  shark	  lines	  are	  used	  in	  many	  fisheries	  and	  
these	  catch	  mostly	  silky	  and	  oceanic	  whitetip	  sharks.	  Since	  the	  retention	  of	  these	  species	  is	  
	  
3	  
prohibited,	  ISSF	  urges	  WCPFC	  to	  prohibit	  the	  use	  of	  shark	  lines	  in	  order	  to	  improve	  
compliance.	  	  
	  
ISSF	  is	  encouraged	  that	  FFA,	  USA	  and	  the	  EU	  are	  seeking	  the	  adoption	  of	  a	  comprehensive	  
and	  robust	  shark	  conservation	  and	  management	  measures	  that	  includes	  the	  removal	  of	  the	  
5%	  fin-­‐to-­‐weight	  ratio,	  which	  was	  highlighted	  at	  TCC10	  as	  being	  an	  area	  of	  non-­‐compliance.	  	  
ISSF	  supports	  amending	  CMM	  2010-­‐07	  to	  mandate	  that	  fins	  remain	  naturally	  attached	  for	  
all	  sharks	  landed.	  	  Moreover,	  the	  CMM	  should	  include	  the	  implementation	  of	  a	  range	  of	  
proven	  shark	  catch	  mitigation	  measures,	  improved	  data	  collection	  and	  reporting,	  and	  the	  
development	  of	  stock-­‐specific	  reference	  points..	  	  
	  
• 
Longlining	  and	  Transshipment.	  	  ISSF	  notes	  with	  concern	  the	  low	  levels	  of	  observer	  coverage	  
(data	  indicates	  that	  coverage	  rates	  may	  be	  less	  than	  the	  required	  5%)	  and	  the	  failure	  of	  some	  
CCMs	  to	  provide	  the	  required	  transshipment	  reports	  or	  advance	  notifications.	  	  ISSF	  notes	  that	  
electronic	  monitoring	  systems	  are	  being	  tested	  and	  developed	  which	  could	  potentially	  be	  used	  
to	  address	  some	  of	  these	  problems.	  
	  
ISSF	  urges	  WCPFC11	  to	  impose	  and	  enforce,	  as	  a	  precautionary	  measure,	  measures	  to	  limit	  
longliner	  capacity	  in	  the	  Convention	  Area.	  	  ISSF	  also	  urges	  the	  Commission	  to	  task	  its	  
scientific	  body	  to	  make	  recommendations	  to	  WCPFC12	  regarding	  the	  levels	  of	  longline	  
capacity	  consistent	  with	  sustainable	  exploitation	  and	  prudent	  management	  of	  target	  tuna	  
stocks.	  	  ISSF	  further	  urges	  the	  Commission	  to	  amend	  its	  transshipment	  measure	  (CMM	  
2009-­‐06)	  in	  order	  to	  address	  these	  significant	  gaps	  in	  its	  effectiveness,	  which	  affect	  
traceability	  of	  the	  products	  and	  could	  result	  in	  IUU	  fishing.	  
	  
• 
Closed	  Vessel	  Registries	  and	  Management	  of	  Fleet	  Capacity.	  	  Experts	  agree	  that	  there	  is	  
overcapacity	  in	  the	  global	  tuna	  fleets.	  	  Fishing	  fleet	  overcapacity	  increases	  pressure	  to	  weaken	  
management	  measures	  and	  eventually	  leads	  to	  stock	  overexploitation.	  	  	  
	  
ISSF	  continues	  to	  be	  concerned	  with	  the	  growth	  of	  fishing	  capacity	  in	  the	  WCPO	  region,	  
which	  has	  not	  been	  curtailed	  through	  the	  provisions	  adopted	  in	  CMM	  2013-­‐01.	  	  To	  
underscore	  this	  importance	  of	  this	  issue,	  in	  October	  ISSF	  clarified	  its	  Resolution	  to	  Limit	  
the	  Growth	  in	  Fishing	  Capacity	  of	  the	  Global	  Large-­‐Scale	  Tropical	  Tuna	  Purse	  Seine	  Fleet.	  	  
Through	  this	  Resolution,	  ISSF	  Participating	  Companies	  must	  refrain	  from	  transactions	  
in	  skipjack,	  bigeye	  and	  yellowfin	  tuna	  caught	  by	  large	  scale1	  purse	  seine	  vessels	  
that	  are	  not	  actively	  fishing	  for	  tuna,	  or	  under	  contract	  for	  construction,	  as	  of	  
December	  31,	  2012	  or	  a	  replacement	  for	  an	  existing	  vessel.	  	  	  
	  
ISSF	  urges	  the	  WCPFC	  to	  establish	  limited	  entry	  through	  closed	  vessel	  registries	  and	  to	  
develop	  a	  common	  currency	  to	  measure	  fishing	  capacity,	  such	  as	  cubic	  meters	  of	  well	  
volume.	  	  ISSF	  also	  supports	  the	  Kobe	  III	  call	  for	  creating	  mechanisms	  to	  transfer	  capacity	  to	  
developing	  countries.	  	  
	  
These	  steps	  should	  be	  taken	  now,	  since	  scaling	  back	  purse	  seine	  fleet	  capacity	  will	  become	  
even	  more	  difficult	  as	  new	  vessels	  are	  introduced.	  	  
	  
Given	  the	  importance	  of	  a	  mechanism	  to	  transfer	  capacity	  to	  developing	  countries	  to	  any	  
regional	  capacity	  management	  scheme,	  ISSF	  hosted	  a	  Workshop	  in	  March	  2014	  to	  start	  a	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1	  For	  the	  purpose	  of	  this	  resolution,	  large-­‐scale	  purse	  seine	  vessels	  are	  those	  at	  least	  335	  m3	  fish	  hold	  volume.	  
	  
4	  
dialogue	  on	  this	  issue.	  	  ISSF	  hopes	  this	  Workshop	  and	  dialog	  will	  contribute	  to	  progressing	  
capacity	  management	  in	  the	  tuna	  RFMOs.	  The	  workshop	  report	  can	  be	  accessed	  here:	  
http://iss-­‐foundation.org/resources/downloads/?did=522	  
