1 
 
 
COMMISSION 
 ELEVENTH REGULAR SESSION  
Faleata Sports Complex, Apia, SAMOA  
1 - 5 December 2014 
WWF WCPFC11 Position Statement 2014 
WCPFC11-2014-OP10 
17 November 2014 
Paper by WWF 
 
11th Regular Session of the Western Central Pacific Fisheries 
Commission (WCPFC): Apia, Samoa – December 1-5, 2014 
 
The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) would like to again thank the Western and Central Pacific 
Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) for the opportunity to attend the 11th Regular Session as an observer 
and to address the critically important role that it plays in the proper management of the (Western 
Central Pacific Ocean) WCPO fisheries.  
WWF once again calls on members of the WCPFC to address the issues and recommendations raised 
at SC10, TCC10, and WCPFC10 as well as observe the experience of other RFMOs in their own efforts 
to achieve and maintain improved measures for monitoring and surveillance.  WWF wishes to 
reiterate its position offered in Cairns in December 2013 (WCPFC10) and, taking into account the 
WCPFC-related meetings held since, the recommendations listed below as well as other documents 
submitted to the WCPFC for review as Observer Papers. 
WWF remains supportive of the work of the WCPFC and subsidiary bodies in pursuing the 
implementation of Reference Points (RP), Harvest Control Rules (HCR), and Harvest Strategies (HS).  
Consistent with previous WWF position statements and recommendations, WWF encourages the 
WCPFC11 to develop and implement the adoption of explicit Limit and Target Reference Points 
(LRP/TRP), HCRs, and HSs for all WCPO fishery stocks under WCPFC authority. 
Therefore, WWF welcomes the proposal by Australia for a CMM on establishing a harvest strategy for 
key tuna species in the WCPO.  We support the approach that the draft CMM will seek the 
Commission’s agreement to formally develop a HS approach to fisheries for the major tuna stocks 
under the Commission’s purview with a goal toward achieving individual harvest strategies for specific 
fisheries developed in accordance with this CMM that, in turn, set out the management actions 
necessary to achieve defined biological, economic, and social objectives for each fishery.  If WCPFC11 
takes appropriate action on this CMM, it will provide a sufficient framework for moving forward 
management in a methodical way to result in valid and effective LTRPs and HCRs. 
WWF strongly commends the initiative of the PNA to establish and implement a TRP for the SKJ 
stock in PNA waters.  WWF also supports Japan’s development of an alternative CMM for an SKJ TRP 
© Gregg Yan/ WWF 
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 11th Regular Session, Apia, Samoa, 1-5 December 2014 
2 
recently presented for review by the WCPFC.  Both proposals present valuable perspectives and strong 
commitments to sustainability and precaution.  We encourage a robust discussion about the proposed 
levels for the TRPs in the different proposals and, upon compromising and selecting a candidate TRP 
at this meeting, support the application of that TRP throughout the WCPO. Lastly, WWF notes the 
SC10 and TCC10 support for the analyses of these important management measures as well as their 
recommendation that WCPFC11 take the results of the papers presented at this meeting into 
consideration when considering the adoption of TRPs and HCRs for the key target species.  
WWF recommends that the WCPFC: 
 
Adopt and implement the proposed CMM on Establishing a Harvest Strategy for 
Key Tuna Species in the WCPO;  
 
Adopt and Implement a CMM consistent with proposed recommendations on a 
TRP for Skipjack Tuna at a level of 0.50SSBF=0,t1-t2 or higher; 
 
Support the continued development and implementation of LRPs and TRPs as a 
priority for proper management of all stocks; 
 
Support interim precautionary TRPs as a benchmark for further consideration 
by the WCPFC in 2014; and 
 
Support the continued development and implementation of HCRs that ensure 
the transparent and efficient management of stocks in relation to LRPs and 
TRPs. 
Many shark species in the WCPO remain subject to high levels of fishing mortality that current stock 
assessment trends suggest could be unsustainable. Sharks play a critical role in the WCPO marine 
ecosystem as apex predators and indicators of ecosystem health. WWF is concerned with shark 
conservation and sustainability in the WCPFC region as a whole and considers responsible 
management, trade, and consumption where shark mortality occurs in all fishing activities, not just in 
circumstances where tuna fishing is occurring.  Therefore, WCPFC must also recognise the needs of 
coastal States in the WCPFC region to manage their shark populations.   
WWF recommends the WCPFC adopt and implement measures proposed during 2013 to ensure that 
sharks stocks are not adversely impacted in the region, while also ensuring that some key shark 
species are not being substantially depleted.  Therefore, we encourage the WCPFC to adopt 
precautionary measures to reduce fishing mortality consistent with recommendations made 
previously by the SC and drawn from the discussion regarding a proposed integrated shark CMM. By 
way of reference, we again endorse the recommendations contained in sections 4.1 and 4.2 of the 
paper presented by Dr. Shelley Clarke to the WCPFC in 2013 in addition to measures recommended 
below. 
WWF recommends the WCPFC: 
 
Adopt and implement a Comprehensive Shark CMM that includes efforts to: 
o Mandate bycatch best practices consistent with those found in the 
Compendium of Best Practice of Conservation and Management 
Measures (CMMs) for the of Species Bycatch in Tuna RFMOs; 
o Implement the recommendations for bycatch that were endorsed at Kobe 
III and adopt an annually updated report card system against these 
recommendations for all of the WCPFC fisheries; 
o Require, through data collected from observer programs and other 
means, estimation of the number of captures and releases of all sharks 
and rays, including the status upon release (dead or alive), and reporting 
of this information to the WCPFC; 
o Require, through observers programs, recording what gear is used in 
longline activities including the use of wire traces and any multi- 
monofilament traces in order to avoid bite-off by sharks. 
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 11th Regular Session, Apia, Samoa, 1-5 December 2014 
3 
o Introduce a scheme to document the capture and trade of sharks whereby 
it allows for traceability through to the final market state; and 
o Ensure the implementation requirements for CITES listed sharks are fully 
understood and planned for in preparation for CITES Parties and Non-
Parties trading with CITES Parties needing to make Non-detriment 
(Sustainability) and legal findings in order to issue export permits for 
trade in these species by September 2014. Where WCPFC members make 
non-detriment findings for shark species they should share with the 
WCPFC details of the basis of those findings.  
 
Encourage the development of reference points and management for non-target 
species, including all shark species, as envisaged under Articles 5 and 10 of the 
WCPF Convention. 
 
Encourage CCM’s to report all shark catches from domestic fleets operating in 
territorial and archipelagic waters. 
In December 2013, WCPFC10 adopted yet another measure, CMM 2013-01, in an attempt to address 
continuing conservation challenges involving bigeye tuna (BET). The WCP–CA bigeye catch for 2013 
(158,662 mt) was only slightly lower than in 2012.  The provisional purse seine catch estimate for 
bigeye tuna for 2013 (82,151 mt) was the highest on record.  The record high bigeye tuna catch in 2013 
coincides with a continuation of high effort levels and elevated bigeye tuna catch rates for all set types. 
The number of purse seine vessels in the tropical fishery remains at an all-time high (297 vessels) and 
total effort (in terms of fishing days estimated from logbook data and VMS data) was also highest.  
Fishing mortality is currently 1.57 times that which will support the maximum sustained yield.  As a 
result, the BET stock is now at 16% of its historic biomass and is experiencing overfishing and 
overfished.  Once again, even the most optimistic interpretation of these results may be characterised 
by the word “failure.”   
While WWF maintains that the policy choices made repeatedly by the WCPFC fail to achieve 
meaningful conservation of BET, we believe that there could be substantial improvements to the 
understanding of the impact of Fish Aggregating Devices (FADs) through the aggressive pursuit of 
improved monitoring, surveillance, and general research involving FADs followed by appropriately 
targeted limits or management measures.  While there are ongoing efforts within the SPC and PNA to 
pursue greater understanding of FAD dynamics, we believe that the WCPFC should impose measures 
in support of FAD research aided by monitoring and surveillance mechanisms which could, for 
instance, improve the understanding of the impacts on species composition resulting from: 
 
FAD type/size 
 
Geographic location 
 
Drift patterns and prevailing currents 
 
Ocean depth and depth of FAD materials 
 
Proximity to benthic relief/hydrogeographic features 
The WCPFC absolutely must make effective and enforceable reductions of the catch in all sectors to 
achieve a meaningful conservation impact for BET.  Most importantly, whatever measures the WCPFC 
selects absolutely must be subject to strong monitoring, control, and surveillance measures 
WWF recommends that the WCPFC: 
 
Establish and support further research and monitoring of FADs. 
 
Engage in an open and transparent deliberative process based on the best 
available scientific information to determine the level of reductions in BET catch 
necessary to achieve meaningful BET conservation. 
 
Revise the current Tropical Tunas CMM to achieve substantial reductions in BET 
mortality. 
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 11th Regular Session, Apia, Samoa, 1-5 December 2014 
4 
Technical reports of both the ISC and the IATTC indicate that the North Pacific Bluefin tuna stock is 
in extremely poor condition.  The ISC confirmed that overfishing is occurring, the stock is heavily 
overfished, and its spawning stock biomass has declined by as much as 96%. This is a clear indicator 
that the management measures taken both in the Western and Central Pacific and in the Eastern 
Pacific are proving insufficient to conserve the biological integrity of this stock. The IATTC and 
WCPFC must assume their share of responsibility. 
WWF maintains strong concerns regarding this stock with an aim of restoring and rebuilding this 
ecologically, sociologically, and economically important fishery resource.  The current science strongly 
indicates that there is only one reproductive cohort that is reaching the end of its life.  Additionally, 
about 90% of the stock fished are young fish that have not yet reproduced.  Thus, the continued 
reproductive success of the entire stock depends on the reproductive success of a single cohort, leaving 
the stock in a critical situation that may seriously jeopardize recruitment. 
If the WCPFC fails to adopt sufficient management measures, the stock will be subject to potential 
collapse.  Should the WCPFC fail to adopt sufficient management measures that are consistent with 
scientific advice, the fishery could ultimately be subject to more draconian management measures 
such as extended closed seasons and areas until such time that managers can prepare a rigorous and 
scientifically defensible recovery plan. 
The WCPFC, consistent with the best scientific information, must adopt and implement measures that 
urgently reduce fishing mortality on Pacific bluefin tuna, especially on juveniles, in order to reduce the 
risk of recruitment collapse and allow spawning stock to rebuild. If sufficient management measures 
cannot be agreed, the WCPFC must recommend that fishing should not be allowed to continue on 
such a depleted stock. 
WWF recommends that the WCPFC: 
 
Adopt the “ CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT MEASURE TO ESTABLISH A 
MULTI-ANNUAL REBUILDING PLAN FOR PACIFIC BLUEFIN TUNA” agreed by 
NC10 and recommend to WCPFC11. 
 
Adopt a long-term Pacific bluefin tuna recovery plan, candidate limit and target 
reference points, and harvest control rules that are well-defined, pre-agreed and 
contain mandatory actions for a determined course of management action in 
response to changes in indicators of stock status with respect to reference points 
in 2015. 
 
●
 
© 1986 Panda Symbol WWF - World Wide Fund For Nature (Formerly World Wildlife Fund) 
® “WWF” is a WWF Registered Trademark. 
 
Vision: The world’s oceans are healthy, well-managed and full of life, providing valuable resources for the welfare 
of humanity. 
 
2020 Goals: The responsible management and trade of four key fishery populations results in recovering and 
resilient marine eco-systems, improved livelihoods for coastal communities and strengthened food security for the 
Planet.  
 
For more information  
 
Alfred “Bubba” Cook 
WCP Tuna Program Manager 
acook@wwf.panda.org 
Tel: +64 4 499 2930 
Mob: +64 27 833 0537 
  
 
 
WWF Smart Fishing Initiative 
Moenckebergstr. 27                                          
20095 Hamburg  
 
Tel. +49 40 530 200 310 
 
www.panda.org/smartfishing 
 
