  
     
  
International Game Fish Association
Fishing Hall of Fame & Museum 
300 Gulf Stream Way, Dania Beach, Florida, 33004 U.S.A. 
Phone:  (954) 927-2628  •  Fax: (954) 924-4299 • Museum Fax (954) 924-4220 
 
 
Western Central Pacific Fisheries Commission 
 
POLICY STATEMENT
 
The International Game Fish Association (IGFA) is a non-profit organization that represents 
recreational anglers throughout the world.  IGFA was established in 1939, and has active 
members in 123 countries, is the governing body for international recreational fishing, and 
provides rules for ethical angling practices.  Many of IGFA’s members target highly migratory 
species managed by WCPFC. 
 
IGFA has an International Committee of Representatives in nearly 90 countries, who have been 
chosen for their integrity, fishing knowledge for sportsmanship and conservation.  These 
representatives report to IGFA on issues affecting our interests and are the primary way that 
IGFA participates in the recreational fishing community. 
 
In addition to compiling decades of catch information from around the world, IGFA staff, 
trustees and international representatives participate in international cooperative research and 
management efforts.  Presently, IGFA represents its members and recreational anglers in general 
on numerous regional, national and international fisheries management panels, and also funds 
and participates in research relating to game fish and their habitats.  When participating in 
cooperative research or management, IGFA’s core purpose is to provide a link and facilitate 
interaction and information exchange between recreational anglers and fisheries scientists and 
managers.   
 
IGFA is extremely interested in the progress of the WCPFC and is hopeful that it will be more 
successful in managing catch, effort and stocks than many other international fisheries 
management organizations.   
 
IGFA requests that the WCPFC management plan takes into consideration the economically and 
socially important recreational fishery.   
 
IGFA considers that the management plan must also take into consideration the artisanal fishers 
of the region.   
 
IGFA believes that spatial management should also be taken into consideration.  
 
IGFA would be pleased to consult and advise member states on the economic importance of 
recreational fishing and its related tourism benefits that it creates. 
 
December 2006 
 
 
 
Officers 
George G. Matthews 
    Chairman 
Robert E. Rich, Jr. 
     Vice Chairman 
Rob Kramer 
   President 
Ralph G. Christiansen Jr. 
   Secretary 
Pamela S. Basco  
   Treasurer 
 
 
Board of Trustees 
John W. Anderson II 
Terri K. Andrews  
Jose “Pepe” Anton 
Pamela S. Basco 
Jose Luis Beistegui 
Stewart N. Campbell 
Ralph G. Christiansen Jr. 
Michael L. Farrior 
Peter S. Fithian 
Alfred C. Glassell, Jr. 
Floyd D. Gottwald Jr. 
Guy Harvey, Ph.D. 
George G. Matthews 
K. Neil Patrick 
Kaye Pearson 
Carlos Pellas 
Robert E. Rich Jr. 
Bill Shedd 
John F. Willits 
Joan Salvato Wulff 
 
 
Past Chairmen 
Michael Lerner 
William K. Carpenter 
Elwood K. Harry 
George G. Matthews  
Michael J. Levitt 
 
 
Trustee Emeritus 
Maumus F. Claverie Jr. 
Ruben Jaen 
John L. Morris 
Roy E. Naftzger 
Donald J. Tyson 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The International Game Fish Association is a not-for-profit organization committed to the conservation of game fish and the 
promotion of responsible, ethical angling practices through science, education, rule making and record keeping.  
 
Email:  HQ@igfa.org  • Website: www.igfa.org 
 
 
 
 
 
 
