 
 
TWELFTH REGULAR SESSION 
Bali, Indonesia  
3 - 8 December 2015 
 
IPNLF POSITION STATEMENT FOR WCPFC12 
 
WCPFC12-2015-OP07 
20 November 2015 
 
 
 
 
Paper by International Pole and Line Foundation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IPNLF POSITION STATEMENT 
12th Regular Session of the Western and Central  
Pacific Fisheries Commission 
Bali, Indonesia 03 – 08 December 2015 
The International Pole & Line Foundation (IPNLF) is an international charity working to develop and 
demonstrate the value of one-by-one tuna fisheries to thriving coastal communities. Its role is two-fold: to 
promote the benefits of one-by-one fisheries; and to develop these fisheries – to support and improve their 
viability and sustainability. We work across science, policy and the seafood sector to improve the wellbeing of 
coastal communities who are committed to environmentally and socially responsible one-by-one fishing 
methods, such as pole-and-line, troll, and handline.   
As this is the IPNLF’s first time attending the WCPFC Regular Session, we would like to thank all Members 
and the Secretariat for the opportunity to participate as an observer. We recognise that managing the fisheries 
for highly migratory species across the Western and Central Pacific Ocean is a complex undertaking, and we 
appreciate the opportunity to contribute.  
An important part of our work involves connecting people and organisations that want to support the sustainable 
development of one-by-one fisheries. Our membership – which currently stands at 30 – includes a broad range 
of organisations and businesses involved in the one-by-one tuna supply chain. They have proven to be active 
collaborators, and together have already accomplished some great successes. 
 
One-by-one fishery in Bitung, Indonesia. Photo © Paul Hilton & IPNLF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the WCPFC Convention Area, IPNLF together with our partner, Asosiasi Perikanan Pole & Line Dan 
Handline Indonesia (AP2HI), is working to improve several aspects of the one-by-one fisheries in Indonesia. 
Some of the projects we are involved in include: improvements in monitoring of catch, effort and vulnerable 
species interactions; supporting the development of a tuna harvest strategy and management plan; improvements 
in compliance; deployment of onboard observers; and establishing a registry of vessels.  
 
Furthermore, recent IPNLF-supported workshops have allowed greater outreach with Indonesian fisheries 
managers, processors and fishers, and have resulted in the improved understanding of the precautionary 
approach, training on livebait handling and storage, and protection of critical habitats.  Drawing on our network 
of international experts, and working with AP2HI’s 18 member companies and their fishers, our goal is to 
improve the sustainability, quality and profitability of one-by-one tuna catches throughout Indonesia. 
   
At this year’s Commission meeting, IPNLF encourages members, cooperating non-members and participating 
territories (CCMs collectively) to adopt a number of conservation and management measures (CMMs) that, 
together, will strengthen the framework for sustainable tuna fisheries in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean. 
Specifically, we urge progress in the following areas: 
• 
Establishment of reference points and harvest control rules for all major tuna species that aim to avoid 
adverse impacts on, and ensure access to fisheries by, subsistence, small-scale and artisanal fishers; 
• 
Adoption of rebuilding plans for overfished tuna stocks;  
• 
Improved data acquisition and reporting of catches of target and bycatch species;  
• 
Improved data collection and regulation of fishing gears that negatively impact coastal communities, 
including drifting fish aggregating devices (dFADs);  
• 
Adoption of measures that will effectively reduce bycatch and protect endangered, threatened, or 
protected species, including sharks, seabirds, cetaceans, and turtles.  
The proposals on a harvest strategy workplan and reference points for skipjack tuna and south Pacific albacore 
tuna are particularly important this year in the face of ever-increasing fishing effort. If adopted, more sustainable 
management frameworks will benefit every CCM, bring positive long-term returns to fishing communities, and 
minimise the risk of future fisheries collapse.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
      
 
One-by-one American Albacore fishery. Photo © AAFA 
 
Measures should also be adopted to improve information on the ecosystem impacts of fisheries. This includes 
the impacts of dFADs on fish populations and damage to coastal habitats, such as coral reefs, from abandoned 
and lost FADs. Bycatch of sharks, turtles, cetaceans, and seabirds are also key ecosystem issues, which require 
continued attention from WCPFC CCMs to ensure measures are both effective and enforceable.  
The Western and Central Pacific Ocean is home to the world’s largest tuna fishery, and to the world’s largest 
pole-and-line fishery. IPNLF would like to see management measures adopted that safeguard tuna stocks and 
ecosystems so that one-by-one fisheries, and the social benefits they provide to the communities that depend on 
them, can flourish. We will continue to work with our members to strive for the highest environmental and social 
standards, which will reinforce the good work of the Commission.  
We look forward to working with all delegations at the 2015 Regular Session in Bali, and we are hopeful that 
the CCMs will find common ground in supporting management improvements.   
Martin Purves – Fishery Development Director 
Andrew Harvey – Indonesia Country Director 
Adam Baske – Advisor, Policy and Advocacy 
 
Keep informed about the latest developments in one-by-one tuna fisheries by connecting with us 
on facebook, twitter and linkedin. 
