1 
 
 
COMMISSION 
 ELEVENTH REGULAR SESSION  
Faleata Sports Complex, Apia, SAMOA  
1 - 5 December 2014 
LETTER TO WCPFC ON OPERATIONAL LEVEL CATCH AND EFFORT DATA  
WCPFC11-2014-OP14_rev11 
21 November 2014 
 
From IUCN, ISSF, Monteray Bay Aquarium, American Research Fishermens Association, Western 
Fish Boatowners Association, American Tuna Boat Association, Hawaii Longline Association, Fish 
Wise, New England Aquarium, PEW Charitable Trusts, WWF, Sustainable Fish Partnerships and 
Fiji Tuna Boatowners Association 
 
 
 
The original version of the letter was circulated to CCMs as WCPFC Circular 2014/99 
                                                 
1 The original letter circulated as WCPFC Circular 2014/99 has been replaced with an revised letter that includes an 
update to the signatures. 
November 19, 2014 
Dr. Lara Manarangi-Trott 
Interim Executive Director 
Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission 
Kaselehlie Street PO Box 2356 
Kolonia, Pohnpei State, 96941, Federated States of Micronesia 
Dear Dr. Manarangi-Trott: 
This letter is submitted on behalf of the undersigned non-governmental and industry 
organizations that participate and have a strong interest in the Western and Central Pacific 
Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) processes and outcomes.  Collectively our organizations have 
thousands of staff working in offices and partner organizations in over a 100 countries and 
engage suppliers and provide advice to retailers, buyers and food service sectors regarding 
improvements in tuna sustainability.  In addition, the undersigned industry organizations 
represent a considerable number of purse seine, longline and pole & line vessels active in WCPO 
tuna fisheries. 
We are writing to the Commission regarding the serious problem of non-provision of operational 
catch and effort data by four Commission members - China, Japan, Korea and Chinese Taipei.  
The non-provision of operational level data from these CCMs must be addressed by the 
Commission at its upcoming meeting in Apia, Samoa as an urgent priority, consistent with the 
standards set out in the Scientific Data to be Provided to the Commission.  
The Science Provider, SPC has clearly enumerated the impact of operational level data gaps at 
recent meetings of the Scientific Committee and Technical and Compliance Committee.  These 
impacts include:   
• 
Inadequate breakdown of catch/effort by areas of national jurisdiction and the high seas 
or estimate catch/effort between EEZs and the high seas and therefore unable to provide 
scientific advice that effectively ameliorates the impact of fishing;  
• 
Inability to accurately attribute catches from flag States to charter States due to possible 
double-counting;  
• 
Failure to provide a complete set of catch and effort data for the public domain because 
of adherence to the Commission’s “3 vessel rule” for public domain data;  
• 
Insufficient assessment of the effectiveness of aspects of conservation measures, 
particularly spatial elements;  
• 
Preventing the use of fine-scale stock assessment models, such as the SEAPODYM 
model that rely on operational level data as the fishery-dependent data input; 
• 
Increased uncertainties in stock assessments due to inability to determine the effects of 
targeting shifts on catches and catch rates, which affect the scientific advice in unknown 
ways;  
-   - 
2	  
• 
Undermining the ability to identify historical trends in stock status that are not evident in 
aggregate data, and that could be taken into account in the stock assessments; for 
example, obtaining a better understanding of declines in longline bigeye tuna CPUE 
which are not apparent without access to operational data;  
• 
Lack of integration between high seas VMS data with catch and effort data that is critical 
in verifying manual reporting information and operational data against VMS reports; 
• 
Ineffectual verification and reconciliation of transhipment reports between the volumes of 
catch reported as transhipped and reported catches in logbooks; and 
• 
Inability to determine the effectiveness of different mitigation methods on specific 
non-­‐target species.  
 
These four Commission members all have significant fleets operating in the WCPO, but have 
never provided the required operational level data to WPCFC.  Moreover, none of these CCMs 
have submitted plans to resolve the impediments preventing the provision of operational catch 
and effort data as requested by the Commission in 2010.   
Furthermore, the failure to provide operational level data by some of these same four CCMs is 
not limited only to the WCPO.  A recent paper presented at the IOTC Working Party on Tropical 
Tunas, held from 15-19 November in Bali, Indonesia (http://www.iotc.org/documents/spatial-
considerations-bigeye-and-yellowfin-cpue-japanese-and-taiwanchina-longline), illustrates how 
insufficient operational level data undermines the development of standardized longline CPUE 
indices, which are critically important inputs to stock assessments of bigeye and yellowfin tuna 
in the Indian Ocean.  
This is an unacceptable situation and one that is not only undermining the effectiveness of 
WCPFC conservation and management measures, its MCS tools, the work of the scientists and 
transparency, but is also providing an unfair advantage to those nations because their degree of 
compliance cannot be evaluated.  Moreover, it continues to place an unfair conservation burden 
on other WCPFC members who are implementing the conservation measures in good faith 
consistent with international law. 
 
We note that an arrangement was drafted on the margins of SC10 between some of these CCMs 
and SPC to facilitate the availability of operational data for the Pacific wide bigeye stock 
assessment scheduled for 2015 (See Attachment F of the SC10 Report).  While this arrangement 
may provide for some limited access to these needed data next year, it should not be viewed as a 
substitute for these CCMs’ complying in full with the WCPFC data reporting requirements, nor 
should it be seen as fulfilling these fishing nations’ outstanding reporting obligations.  
 
We urge the following actions to address this matter, and to broadly deter CCM non-compliance 
with WCPFC obligations, at its upcoming meeting in Apia: 
1. That these members act immediately to remedy this non-compliance and act in a manner 
consistent with their binding obligations to the WCPFC Convention.  
-   - 
3	  
2. That the WCPFC take swift action, such as triggering paragraph 7 of the WCPFC Data 
Rules for Non-Public Domain Data, as well as urgently developing, adopting and 
implementing a scheme for WCPFC responses to non-compliance as called for in the 
Compliance Monitoring Scheme measure (paragraph 1(iv) of CMM 2013-02), including 
assessing appropriate penalties to effectively deter this type of repeated and serious non-
compliance.  
3. That the Commission consider using its voting provisions, as outlined in Article 20 of the 
Convention, to address this persistent non-compliance in providing operational level data, 
if a decision by the Commission is going to be blocked by those members.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
-   - 
4	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	   	  
	  
	  
	  
	  	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
-   - 
5	  
	  
