 
 
FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 
8-12 December 2008 
Busan, Korea      
INTERNATIONAL GAME FISH ASSOCIATION POSITION STATEMENT 
WCPFC5-2008/OP09 
9 December 2008 
      
  
International Game Fish Association 
Fishing Hall of Fame & Museum 
300 Gulf Stream Way, Dania Beach, Florida, 33004 U.S.A. 
Phone:  (954) 927-2628  •  Fax: (954) 924-4299 • Museum Fax (954) 924-4220 
 
The international Game Fish Association (IGFA) is a non-profit organisation that represents 
recreational anglers throughout the world.  IGFA was established in 1939, and has active members in 
123 countries, is the governing body for international recreational fishing, and provides rules for 
ethical angling practices.  Many of IGFA’s members target highly migratory species managed by the 
WCPFC. 
 
IGFA has an International Committee of Representatives in 80 countries, who have been chosen for 
their integrity, fishing knowledge, sportsmanship and conservation work.  These representatives report 
to IGFA on issues affecting our interests and are the primary way that IGFA participates in the 
recreational fishing community. 
In addition to compiling decades of catch information from around the world, IGFA staff, trustees and 
international representatives participate in international cooperative research and management efforts.  
Presently, IGFA represents its members and recreational anglers in general on numerous regional, 
national and international fisheries management panels, and also funds and participates in research 
relating to game fish and their habitats.  When participating in cooperative research or management, 
IGFA’s core purpose is to provide a link and facilitate interaction and information exchange between 
recreational anglers and fisheries scientists and managers.   
 
IGFA is extremely interested in the progress of the WCPFC and is hopeful that it will be more 
successful in managing catch, effort and stocks than many of the other international fisheries 
management organisations.  IGFA requests that the WCPFC management plan takes into 
consideration the economically and socially important recreational fishery.   
 
IGFA understands that the management plan must also take into consideration the artisanal fishers of 
the region.   
 
IGFA believes that spatial management should also be taken into consideration.  IGFA would be 
pleased to consult and advise member states on the economic importance of recreational fishing and 
the related tourism benefits that it creates. 
 
IGFA requests that your statistics and scientific reports reflect the effect on the stocks targeted by 
recreational fisheries including all marlins.  IGFA believes it can make a meaningful contribution to 
the meeting as an observer and help in decisions to keep the conservation of fish stocks to levels that 
are economically viable to the commercial and recreational industries.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Officers 
George G. Matthews 
    Chairman 
Robert E. Rich, Jr. 
     Vice Chairman 
Rob Kramer 
   President 
Ralph G. Christiansen 
Jr. 
   Secretary 
Pamela S. Basco  
   Treasurer 
 
Board of Trustees 
Terri K. Andrews  
Jose “Pepe” Anton 
Pamela S. Basco 
Jose Luis Beistegui 
Stewart N. Campbell 
Ralph G. Christiansen 
Jr. 
Michael L. Farrior 
Peter S. Fithian 
Floyd D. Gottwald Jr. 
Guy Harvey, Ph.D. 
George G. Matthews 
Paxson H. Offield 
K. Neil Patrick 
Kaye Pearson 
Carlos F. Pellas 
Robert E. Rich Jr. 
Bill Shedd 
John F. Willits 
Joan Salvato Wulff 
 
Past Chairmen 
Michael Lerner 
William K. Carpenter 
Elwood K. Harry 
George G. Matthews  
Michael J. Levitt 
 
Trustee Emeritus 
Maumus F. Claverie 
Jr. 
Ruben Jaen 
John L. Morris 
Donald J. Tyson 
 
 
 
 
 
 The International Game Fish Association is a not-for-profit organization committed to the conservation of game fish 
and the promotion of responsible, ethical angling practices through science, education, rule making and record 
keeping.  
 
Email:  HQ@igfa.org
  • Website: www.igfa.org 
