1 
 
 
 
COMMISSION 
SIXTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea 
5 – 11 December 2019 
STATEMENT TO WCPFC16 
WCPFC16-2019-OP12 
29 November 2019 
 
Submitted by North Pacific Fisheries Commission (NPFC) 
North Pacific Fisheries Commission 
 
   2nd Floor Hakuyo Hall 
Tokyo University of Marine Science and Technology 
4-5-7 Konan, Minato-ku, Tokyo 
108-8477 JAPAN 
TEL 
+81-3-5479-8717 
FAX 
+81-3-5479-8718 
Email secretariat@npfc.int 
Web 
www.npfc.int 
 
Observer Statement  
North Pacific Fisheries Commission (NPFC) 
By Dae-Yeon Moon, Executive Secretary 
 
Good morning,  
Ms. Riley Kim, Chair of WCPFC, Mr. Feleti Teo, Executive Director, distinguished delegates, 
observers, and ladies and gentlemen. 
 
On behalf of the North Pacific Fisheries Commission, I would like to extend our sincere 
appreciation to members of WCPFC and the Executive Director for inviting the North Pacific 
Fisheries Commission to attend the 16th Regular Session of WCPFC as an observer.  
 
As stated through an observer statement at the annual meeting of WCPFC held in Hawaii, 
cooperation with relevant international organizations is one of our mandates in accordance with our 
Convention and accordingly we, as a relatively young RFMO, have made linkages with a number 
of organizations since commencement in 2015, including formal cooperation arrangements with 
NPAFC and PICES with a view to exchanging information and collaborating in matters of common 
interest. 
 
Continuing from last year, I would like to stress the importance of cooperation between WCPFC 
and NPFC, which share responsibilities for the management of fisheries resources in a large part of 
the North Pacific Ocean. NPFC has set a priority for cooperation with organizations having 
overlapping jurisdiction with that of NPFC, hence the development of a formal tie with WCPFC 
has been supported by the NPFC Commission. To move this initiative forward, the Secretariats of 
both organizations have continued communication and agreed that an MOU arrangement would 
facilitate cooperation between the two organizations.  
 
The areas of collaboration could be broad encompassing compliance, science as well as operational 
aspects, with the first of these as one of the areas of mutual concern that we believe should be 
addressed urgently. We recognize the considerable experience that WCPFC has in monitoring vessel 
activity on the high seas and in some of its Members’ EEZs. As RFMOs with overlapping 
Convention Areas, we both share the global concern with respect to stopping the IUU fishing in our 
respective areas, and as such, we realize the benefits of cooperation on compliance issues. Such 
collaboration provides us with an excellent opportunity to demonstrate to other RFMOs the benefits 
 
2 
of sharing information on activities of “vessels of interest” to either or both RFMOs. NPFC 
Members have stated their intent to take an aggressive stance to address the high levels of IUU 
fishing in the global oceans and therefore wish to initially focus on links with our neighboring 
RFMOs with overlapping jurisdictions. We know we can learn a considerable amount from your 
experience and wish to create formal links for sharing of information and possibly joint operations 
in the overlapping areas. As an example, NPFC notes that several fish carrier vessels are cross-
authorized to operate in both the NPFC and WCPFC Convention Areas, thus providing an excellent 
opportunity to jointly monitor transshipments, this being one of the major gaps in fisheries 
compliance today. When successful, this would be an excellent example of cooperative efforts and 
success in deterring and eliminating IUU fishing in the Northern, Central and Western Pacific Ocean.  
 
We also can benefit from scientific cooperation with WCPFC having many years of experience of 
using diverse scientific methods to address not only target species but also non-target, associated, 
and dependent species. Potential areas of scientific cooperation include collecting, sharing, and 
analyzing data of common interest to both Commissions, exchange of data and information, and 
collaboration on research relating to stocks and ecosystems of the North Pacific. Methods and best 
practices of data collection and setting up observer programs is another promising area for 
cooperation between the organizations. Since both RFMOs are sharing the North Pacific as the 
common Convention Area to a large extent, the exchange of scientific information gathered by each 
side and sharing of information on fishing activities could minimize duplication in efforts and costs 
to cover such a wide area as the North Pacific.  
 
Taking this opportunity, I would like to express our sincere thanks to Mr. Teo and his team of the 
WCPFC Secretariat for their efforts and contribution to the progress in this initiative which we have 
made so far and look forward to continued discussions for a formal MOU between NPFC and 
WCPFC within the next year. To facilitate this process, I would like to invite representatives of the 
WCPFC to participate in our 6th Annual Meetings of the Commission, which will take place in 
Japan during 15-22 June 2020. 
 
Finally, let me thank the government of Papua New Guinea for hosting this meeting at the beautiful 
city of Port Moresby as well as for the great hospitality, and I wish you every success in this 
important meeting.   
 
Thank you very much. 
 
 
