 
 
COMMISSION 
FOURTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Manila, Philippines 
3 – 7 December 2017 
LETTERS TO TUNA RFMOS REGARDING SUSTAINABILITY OF TUNA STOCKS 
WCPFC14-2017-OP02 
7 November 2017 
 
Submission by International Seafood Sustainability Foundation 
 
 
 
1 
March 21, 2017 
 
ATTN: Heads of Delegation to IOTC, IATTC, ICCAT and WCPFC 
 
Dear Delegates, 
 
This letter is submitted on behalf of the undersigned companies, non-governmental 
organizations and fishing industry associations, all of whom recognise that the sustainability of 
tuna stocks is integral to businesses and livelihoods, as well as the health of the marine 
environment.  
 
Our companies represent major seafood buyers that source seafood products from a diverse, 
international supply network. Our non-governmental organizations work in more than 100 
countries and engage suppliers and provide advice to retailers, buyers and food service sectors 
regarding improvements in tuna sustainability. Our fishing industry associations represent a 
variety of gear types, including purse seine, longline, troll, pole and line and handline vessels 
active in tuna fisheries worldwide. 
 
Your government serves as an important leader as a member of one or more of the four 
regional fisheries management organizations (RFMOs) charged with managing the world’s 
tropical tuna fisheries throughout their range.  We are writing to bring to your attention our 
views on the development of harvest strategies and the need for strengthened monitoring, 
control and surveillance tools, such as 100% observer coverage for purse seine vessels in those 
RFMOs that do not yet require it and at- sea transshipment activities and monitoring and 
management of fish aggregating devices (FADs) –  pressing issues that we believe are 
fundamental to sustainable fisheries management - and those that necessitate immediate 
action by all tuna RFMOs.  
 
We recognize that certain tuna RFMOs have made some initial progress in recent years to 
develop harvest strategies, including through the establishment of interim target and limit 
reference points, management objectives, rebuilding time frames for overfished stocks, and 
conducting management strategy evaluations.  In addition, we observe that some RFMOs, such 
as the IATTC and WCPFC, already have 100% observer coverage for large scale purse seine 
vessels. All four tuna RFMOs require at least 5% observer coverage on longline and other types 
of vessels, and some RFMOs are actively developing standards for electronic reporting and 
monitoring. Finally, we note that all tuna RFMOs collect some data on FADs and have had 
working groups consider data needs and management options.  
 
However, we wish to underscore that while this initial progress is positive, we urge accelerated 
action at this year’s RFMO meetings to: 
 
 
 
2 
• Develop precautionary harvest strategies, including specific timelines to adopt target 
reference points, harvest control rules and the other elements of a harvest strategy 
approach that ensures sustainable fisheries for all tuna stocks; 
 
• Adopt a 100% observer coverage requirement for purse seine vessels, where it is not 
already required, and of at sea- transshipment activities and require the use of the best 
available observer safety equipment, communications and procedures; 
 
• Increase compliance with the mandatory 5% longline observer coverage rates by 
identifying and sanctioning non-compliance, and adopt a level of coverage that would 
reduce uncertainty and provide better estimates of bycatch, such as a minimum of 20% 
which has been recommended by the scientific committees of IATTC and ICCAT;  
 
• Adopt standards for electronic reporting and electronic monitoring for all major gear 
types to enable the implementation of this technology to support robust decision 
making; 
  
• Adopt effective measures for the use of non-entangling FAD designs as a precautionary 
measure to minimize the entanglement of sharks and other non-target species, and 
support research on biodegradable materials and the eventual transition to their use in 
FADs in order to mitigate marine debris; and 
 
• Urgently develop science-based recommendations for the management of FADs, 
including how to integrate FAD based information into stock assessments to reduce 
uncertainties. 
 
We request that your government, as a member of one or more of the tuna RFMOs, take active 
steps to ensure significant progress on these issues at each of the relevant RFMO meetings in 
2017, as a matter of priority.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 (Austria) 
 
 
 
 
 
 (South Africa) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
12 
Guayaquil, March 27, 2017 
Mrs. Holly Koehler
Vice President for Policy and Outreach 
hkoehler@iss-foundation.org 
www.iss-foundation.org 
The Tuna Companies; NIRSA, EUROFISH, JADRAN, SERVIGRUP 
and TRIMARINE; who form part of the initiative TUNACONS (Tuna 
Conservation Group), based in Guayaquil – Ecuador, are engaged in 
a FIP (Fishery Improvement Project) for the tuna purse seine fishery 
in the Eastern Pacific Ocean.  The FIP is based on the MSC (Marine 
Stewardship Council) principles of sustainability.  
We 
have 
carefully 
read 
the 
INTERNATIONAL 
SEAFOOD 
SUSTAINABILITY FUNDATION (ISSF) joint RFMO outreach letter 
that was broadly endorsed by major seafood companies, retailers, 
NGOs, and other  tuna industry stakeholders from around  the world.  
The aim of the letter is to urge the Regional Fisheries Management 
Organizations (RFMOs) to take urgent action on tuna conservation by 
adopting resolutions that contribute strongly to improved tuna stock 
abundance and management,  and reducing the negative impacts of 
fishing on the marine ecosystem.  
Our Tuna Conservation Group fully supports the letter and hereby 
adds our voice to the many others calling for greater RFMO action.  
 
 
The adoption of measures for the conservation of the tuna stock, 
consistent with the sustainable development of our productive activity, 
is one of the principles that we constantly hold, together with the CIAT 
(Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission); so, we agree on this 
Global Concern.  
 
We apologize for sending our communication at this stage, but in any 
case, we want to state our position, in name of the tuna companies 
that I represent in this Fishery Improvement Project (FIP).   
 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
 
 
 
Guillermo Moran Velásquez 
TUNACONS Manager 
Nirsa, Eurofish, Jadran, Servigrup and Trimarine 
 
