 
COMMISSION 
FIFTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
            Honolulu, Hawaii, USA 
             10 – 14 December, 2018 
OFAD Report on Pacific Albacore Troll Fishery 2018 
 
 
Submitted by  
Ocean Friends Against Driftnets 
 
WCPFC15-2018-OP16 
10 December 2018 
0830 
 
 
 
 
                              ODAD Report on the Pacific Albacore Troll Fishery in the WCPFA, 2018 
                                                     By Captain John Harder, F/V OCEAN JOY 
The South Pacific Albacore Troll Fishery has been on the decline for the past 12 years, and the 
North Pacific Albacore, inside the Convention area, is practically nonexistent for 15 years. 
The South Pacific Albacore Troll fleet consisted of around 12 vessels this year. Less than 400 
tons were caught by the jig fleet. The area of fish found was not healthy enough to support the 
amount of vessels fishing. The fleet struggled to make expanses. There are only 6 vessels 
starting the 2019 South Pacific Albacore season as of now. Most all are owed by one company, 
otherwise there would be less. 
3 Albacore Troll vessels tried fishing in the North Pacific Convention Area only to fail in their 
efforts to find any productive area. What they did find was wads of driftnet debris from 31%-
34%N x 170%E & 38% N x 176-179%E. This happened to be in the same area that was reported 
last year by authorities to have had no driftnet activity. 
 
                                                                        
 
The 3 vessels left the area emptyhanded and returned to the west coast where there was 
productive catches reported. By mid Sepember, reports of driftnet scratched fish were beeing 
sighted off the coast of Washington, Oregon & Canada. 
                                                                           
 
 
 
 
 
The West Coast Albacore Troll season was not much better than the preveous 2017 season 
which was one of the worst seasons ever. Average season on the coast would have been less 
than 50 tons per vessel. 
 A normal season for a North Pacific Albacore Troller would be around 100+ tons. Each vessel 
would normaly catch around 1 ton+ per day. 
In Conclusion, Albacore Stocks are well below MSY for the Sustainable Pacific Albacore Troll 
Fishery to opperate due to IUU driftnet fishing and or overfishing by longline fishing vessels. 
 
OFAD & Pacific Albacore Trollers, beeing primary stakeholders as fishers, request to the 
WCPFC15 the following provisions: 
Ban all driftnets for highly migratory species, or any other species(including squid), as it 
infringes on our benefits and violates our “freedom of the sea” in international law. 
Organize a “Pacific Albacore Trollers Fund” made by the commission, to pay a reward of 
$500,000.00 for information leeding to a conviction of any IUU driftnet vessels. 
All transhipments of Albacore coming from the Northwestern quadrant be under suspision of 
IUU fishing. 100% observers on all carrior, or freezer ships efective emedeately. All observer 
organizations must make sure that obervers are educated in detecting tuna caught using the 
method of driftnets. Make sure there is a space in the reports made to verrify if fish caught was 
by driftnets, or not.20% observer coverage on all longline vessels over 100 ton gross weight 
efective emedeatly. To be 100% observer coverage on longline vessels within 2 years. 
Heavy fines for any vessels caught, such as 1 million USD, and seize the load. 
We ask that any vessel that is not otherized to transship and otherwize dose, pay a heavy fine & 
seize the load. 
We ask the commission to consider any transshipping, that was unotherized, or not observed, 
to be deemed IUU fish & confinscated with a million USD fine. That all transhipments must be 
submitted to the secritariate, with a cargo manafest, prior to the transhipment date. That 
transshipping be redused by 50% efective emedeatly and be eliminated by the next 2 years. 
We ask that the commission reduse the Albacore Longline effort by 20% in both north and 
south pacific efective emedeatly. 
OFAD & Albacore Trollers in the Convention area request that the commission make a motion 
to Ban the use of pair trawlling for highly migratory species, especialy Albacore tuna as the 
Pacific Ocean has a Troll fishery and therefor would be again infringing on our bennifits and 
rights to freedom of the sea. 
We also ask for total transparency of the TCC relating to the taking of Albacore in the Pacific, 
whethere it be compliant or non compliant, as we are fishers and are efected dirrectly. We 
should be allowed freedom of information to all that pertains to us fisherpersons. 
Distingwished members of the WCPFC, The Pacific Albacore Troll Fishery is a frail and fragile 
fishery that relies on healthy albacore stocks far greater than the scope of science, or best 
avalabel science, without the consideration of the fishery itself. Science can not explain why a 
spacific species of tuna, such as the Albacore, can be harvested by trolling and be productive 
like no other. Nor can science explain the changing of the nature of the species after it has been 
targetted by driftnets. Tuna that have been introduced to driftnets, tend to stop feeding on the 
surface and therfore uncatchable by trolling. 
It only takes 1-2 years of driftnet fishing to deminish a whole fleet of trolling vessels. This has 
been proven before, in the 1980’s and is apon us now. Driftnets have been harvesting Albacore, 
in the WCPFA, for the past 15 years. Albacore trollers have stopped beeing productive for the 
same amount of time. Our livelyhoods depend on this commission to enforce the law with “0” 
tollerance. 
We ask that high sanctions and or tarrifs be put on the countries that are repeat offenders 
using IUU driftnets. 
OFAD & Pacific Albacore Trollers would like to request that the commission make a rulling that 
forbids any pole and line vessel (Example Japanies pole boats) to come within 4 miles of a 
Albacore troll vessel durring fishing, or daylight hrs. It happens to be a fact that once the tuna 
start taking to the bait, they will not feed on the jigs. This also infringes on our bennifits and 
takes away from our freedom of the sea. Let the bait boats find their own fish, and we jig boats 
will do the same. 
We would also request that the commission form a “Pacific Albacore Trollers Fund” for a 
collection of funds to aid our fishery in funding 3 observer vessels to resurch west of the 
dateline durring (in-season) the fishing season. This would help enforcment to cover such a 
large ocean and give much needed scientific data as to the movment and harvesting of the 
Albacore tuna. We have eager fishermen axious to enter the fishery, but have little to no 
resourses to take a risk on loosing the season. For example, 1-300,000.00 USD per vessel, per 
season would sufice. That would be around 900,000.00 USD per year for 3 chartered vessels. 
This would be a great benefit to all by having extra set of eyes and ears to help curb IUU fishing, 
and give our sustainable fishery a boost back into production. 
As it is now, We have the most sustainable tuna fishery in the world, deemed by MSC, that once 
thrived in the WCPFA, dead as a doornail, or dieing on the vine (South Pacific). 
Please, WCPFC, we are in dire need of your help. We are made up of many nations. We have 
fishermen, captains, & crew from USA, Canada, New Zealand, Cook Islands, American & 
Western Samoa, Viet Nam, China, Fiji, Tahiti, Phillapines and south American too. We are not 
governed by one nation, but at the mercie of all nations. As it is not to the benafit of one, but 
for the benafit to all. Please protect us. Enforce the law of the sea. 
Thank you for your consideration and action regarding this matter. 
Sincerely, OFAD & Pacific Albacore Trollers 
Captain John Harder 
info@Oceanfad.org 
 
 
