 
COMMISSION 
FIFTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
            Honolulu, Hawaii, USA 
             10 – 14 December, 2018 
Industry Letter to WCPFC on Swordfish and Mahi Mahi 
WCPFC15-2018-OP21 
14 December 2018 
1530 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by  
SFP 
1 
 
PROPOSAL FOR DEFINING SPECIES-SPECIFIC MANAGEMENT MEASURES FOR 
COMMERCIALLY IMPORTANT MIGRATORY LARGE PELAGIC FISH STOCKS IN 
THE WESTERN AND CENTRAL PACIFIC OCEAN 
 
 
To: The Attending Representatives of Commission Member States, Cooperating 
Non-Member States, Participating Territories and Observers to the Fifteenth 
Regular Session of the Commission for Conservation and Management of Highly 
Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPFC15) 
 
From: List of Signatories, Appendix 1 
 
December 3, 2018 
 
Dear representatives to the WCPFC15: 
 
The undersigned, representatives of seafood industry businesses involved with large 
pelagic fisheries in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, want to highlight the need to 
reinforce the recognized excellent work that the commission is already doing by 
suggesting the adoption of further conservation measures related to species other than 
tuna that are also highly migratory and of great commercial value and importance, such 
as  swordfish (Xiphias gladius) and mahi mahi (Coryphaena hippurus). 
 
1. Proposal regarding Swordfish 
 
In August 2018, WCPFC released a new “Stock Assessment for Swordfish (Xiphias 
gladius) in the Western and Central North Pacific Ocean through 2016 WCPFC-SC14-
2018/ SA-WP-07 Rev. 1 (11 August 2018)”. In the section titled “Abstract”, on page 1 of 
this document it is stated that “Overall, the base case model indicated that the WCNPO 
swordfish stock is not likely overfished and is not likely experiencing overfishing relative 
to MSY-based or 20% of unfished biomass-based reference points”. This is, 
undoubtedly, very good news. 
 
It is also noted on page 2 and 3 of this document, under “Status of Stock”, that the 
Western and Central North Pacific Ocean (WCNPO) swordfish “population biomass 
(age-1 and older) averaged roughly 98,000 mt between 1974-1978, the first 5 years of 
the assessment time frame, and has declined only 20% to about 72,000 mt in 2016”, 
which reveals an modest exploitation rate. 
 
In the outcomes document, the Scientific Working Group has suggested some biological 
reference points, and the agenda for the WCPFC15 put on the table a discussion about 
a harvest strategy for this species. We congratulate the Commission for this, as globally 
recognized good management practices strongly recommend having target and limit 
reference points and harvest control rules. This is also important for getting a practical 
approach to ecosystem-based management.  
 
2 
 
With swordfish under the scope of the WCPFC, and having an accepted stock 
assessment for this stock, we respectfully propose to discuss how to advance further to 
have the aforementioned tools in place and operative as soon as possible. 
 
Such measures will also greatly contribute to what has been established in Paragraph 7 
of WCPFC CMM 2009-3: “Recognizing the need for both Inter-American Tropical Tuna 
Commission (IATCC) and WCPFC to adopt conservation and management measures 
to provide for the sustainable management of swordfish stocks across the Pacific 
Ocean.” 
 
 
2. Proposal regarding Mahi Mahi 
 
Currently WCPFC does not require mahi mahi (mahi) catch data from Member States, 
Cooperating Non-member States or Participating Territories and has not provided any 
species or stock-specific management measures for this species.  
 
However, WCPFC Resolution 2005 – 03 notes “the importance of many non-target fish 
species such as mahi mahi, rainbow runner and wahoo for sustainable livelihoods in 
many communities in the Convention Area”. 
 
Further, in the introduction section to WCPFC–SC2–2006/EB WP–1 “Ecological Risk 
Assessment for species caught in WCPO tuna fisheries: Inherent risk as determined by 
Productivity-Susceptibility Analysis”, it is stated that “There is a general acceptance that 
highly migratory species (UNCLOS Annex 1) are the primary group of species that the 
WCPO Convention and Commission have been designed to manage”. Mahi is one of 
these species and was included in the PSA in WCPFC–SC2–2006/EB WP–1, where it 
was assessed as having a moderate to moderately high ecological risk. 
 
While mahi is an important by-catch species for the industrial tuna fisheries in the area 
of the convention, it is an undervalued species for many small scale fisheries in South 
East Asia. 
 
With all of this in mind, the undersigned ask the Commission to (i) make binding the 
catch reporting for mahi from Members and Cooperating Non-members with immediate 
effect, and (ii) task the Scientific Committee to plan stock assessment work for this 
species with the goal of completion within the next three years and (iii) to define 
minimum management measures based on the PSA results of WCPFC–SC2–2006/EB 
WP–1, while waiting for the results of the future stock assessment. 
 
Improving the management of this species will help protect these fisheries against 
potential over-exploitation in the future. It will also help provide the benefits of well-
managed and internationally recognized sustainable swordfish and mahi fisheries to 
fishing communities throughout the WCNPO, especially those depending on small scale 
fisheries. 
 
3 
 
These measures are also an increasing requirement of the markets where these 
products are sold, so adopting them, aside from the benefits to conservation, will also 
help maintain the value chain and the great number of livelihoods depending on them. 
For small scale mahi fisheries, reaching the best sustainable standards for management 
can be a powerful tool to gain new markets and therefore to improve the incomes of 
thousands of fishers, their families and their communities. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
The Undersigned 
 
Appendix 1: List of Signatories 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Centro Desarrollo y Pesca Sustenable 
Center for Development and Sustainable Fisheries 
Trung Tâm Phát Triển và Thủy Sản bền Vững 
Ernesto Godelman 
 
Chris Rosenberger 
Chris Rosenberger,  
President, Inland Seafood 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guy Dean - VP/CSO 
Albion Farms and Fisheries Ltd. 
 
 
