 
COMMISSION 
 NINTH REGULAR SESSION  
Manila, Philippines 
2-6 December 2012 
Greenpeace – Position paper to WCPFC9 
WCPFC9-2012-OP02_rev1 
 27 November 2012 
 
 
9th Regular Session of the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC9) 
Setting the limits on Western and Central Pacific tuna fisheries  
Manila, Philippines, 2nd – 6th December 2012 
 
Introduction 
This year’s annual meeting of the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) has the 
important task of putting in place new, more effective conservation and management measures 
(CMMs) to correct past mistakes and return the tuna fisheries of the Western and Central Pacific 
Ocean (WCPO) to sustainability and economic viability for the long-term. The failure of parties to this 
Commission to negotiate and implement an effective replacement CMM for bigeye and yellowfin 
tuna at its 8th Annual Session in Guam must not be repeated. Greenpeace urges that the 
Commission take into account first and foremost the precautionary approach when deliberating over 
new conservation and management measures for tuna and other species. The future consequences 
of our failure to act effectively today must not be underestimated.  
 
It is important to note that the current reference points used by the WCPFC for determining the 
‘relative health’ of tuna fisheries – the maximum sustainable yield (MSY) and the corresponding 
biomass (BMSY) and fishing rate (FMSY) – should be, at best, treated as limit reference points (to be 
avoided) according to the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries1 and UN Fish Stocks 
Agreement2. The Commission’s science provider (SPC-OFP) notes that: “given the uncertainties in 
assessing stock status and natural stock variability, practical experience and scientific analysis has 
shown that treating FMSY as a target often results in depletion of fish stocks, and that recovery from 
over-depletion is difficult. The use of MSY as a target is also often sub-optimal economically.”    
 
Greenpeace calls on WCPFC9 to follow the precautionary approach and adopt the following 
combination of measures in order to reduce fishing mortality of bigeye by 50% and reduce the 
threat of overfishing to yellowfin, skipjack, and albacore tuna including other vulnerable and 
endangered species in the region.  
 
1. Permanent closure of the four high seas pockets to all forms of fishing.  
2. Total ban on the use of FADs by purse seine fishing vessels. 
3. Ban all at-sea transhipments. 
4. Ban purse seine sets on whale sharks. 
5. Immediately halt any increase in effort in the southern albacore fishery until precautionary    
catch limits are established by the Commission.  
6. Adopt precautionary limit reference points recommended by SC8 for all target tunas. 
7. Adopt an unconditional ban on shark finning at sea in the WCPO through a requirement that   
shark be landed with fins naturally attached. 
 
                                                           
1 See Article 7.5.3 of FAO (1995). Code of conduct for responsible fisheries. Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture 
Organisation of the United Nations. Available at www.fao.org/fi/agreem/codecond/codecon.asp  
2 Anon. (1995). Agreement for the implementation of the provisions of The United Nations Convention on the 
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the conservation and management of straddling fish stocks 
and highly migratory fish stocks. 
Going, Going, Almost Gone: Why Greenpeace is concerned about the state of fishing in the WCPFC 
Levels of fishing effort and catch for bigeye, yellowfin and skipjack tuna over the past few years have 
been at an all-time high. Overfishing of adult bigeye in the longline fishery, compounded by the 
increased catches of juveniles as by-catch in purse seine FAD fishing has drastically reduced the 
bigeye stock.3 Based on the average recruitment in recent years, scientists concluded that the bigeye 
tuna stock is also likely to have dropped below BMSY and the spawning biomass is as low as 23% of its 
potential spawning level.4 
 
Greenpeace believes that the current 30% reduction in bigeye fishing recommended by the scientific 
committee is not precautionary as it does not take into account uncertainties attached to the key 
parameters and assumptions used as inputs for the management models.  
 
Greenpeace calls on the WCPFC to follow the precautionary approach and reduce fishing mortality of 
bigeye by 50%. 
 
For yellowfin tuna, the threat of overfishing is extremely high, bearing in mind there are significant 
uncertainties involved in the assessments and in one region of the WCPO where the fishery is 
concentrated there are already signs of rapid depletion. The high mortality rate of juvenile yellowfin, 
primarily due to purse seine FAD fisheries is of particular concern.5 
 
The occurrence of range contraction for skipjack and possibly also for yellowfin tuna6, together with 
the corresponding decline in catches for some fleets – such as the Japanese pole-and-line fleet – is 
revealing the intensive nature of fishing taking place in the tropical regions.  Increasing effort for 
southern albacore by China’s and Taiwan’s subsidised distant water fishing fleets is placing pressure 
on the stock and crowding out a fishery, which the smaller domestic longline fleets of the southern 
Pacific island nations7 are reliant on.8 
 
Beyond tuna, oceanic whitetip sharks and silky sharks are in a dangerously poor state. Sharks are 
both targeted and caught as by-catch in the longline fishery. For silky sharks, the greatest impact on 
the stock is attributed to catches from the longline fishery; however there are also significant 
impacts from the FAD-associated purse seine fishery where catches are predominantly juvenile silky 
sharks.  
 
 
                                                           
3 Paragraphs 10 & 18 of Executive Summary, & paragraph 141: SC (2011). Summary Report. Seventh Regular 
Session of the Science Committee, WCPFC. 9–17 August 2011, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia. 
4 See paragraph 141. SC (2011). Summary Report. Seventh Regular Session of the Science Committee, WCPFC. 
9–17 August 2011, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia. Available at http://www.wcpfc.int/node/3961  
5 Paragraphs 27 & 31 of Executive Summary: SC (2011). Summary Report. Seventh Regular Session of the 
Science Committee, WCPFC. 9–17 August 2011, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia.  Available at 
http://www.wcpfc.int/node/3961 
6 Harley S (2010). A proposal to investigate range contraction in for tropical tunas in the WCPO. Eighth Regular 
Session of the Science Committee, WCPFC. 7–15 August 2012, Busan, Republic of Korea. WCPFC‐SC8‐2012/GN‐
IP‐03. Available at http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/GN-IP-03/proposal-investigate-range-contraction-tropical-tunas-
WCPO  
7 South Pacific coastal state participants in the southern albacore fishery include Solomon Islands, Samoa, Fiji, 
Vanuatu, French Polynesia, Cook Islands, American Samoa, Niue, PNG, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, New Caledonia 
and Wallis et Futuna.. 
8 Banks, R., Short, K. and Tuqiri, S (2012). South West Pacific Longline Caught Albacore: Going, Going, Gone? 
WWF Policy Brief to the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission Meeting Guam, March 25-29th 
2012. 
A BIG mistake at WCPFC8: Why the high seas pockets must be closed to all fishing  
Closing areas of importance to fish stocks and other marine life allows the complete ecosystem to be 
protected in a marine reserve. Marine reserves are known to increase the abundance, size and 
diversity of species within them, and also have positive benefits outside of the reserves themselves. 
Greenpeace produced a proposal for the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) highlighting the 
ecological values of the four high seas pockets.9 This report shows that there is a strong biological 
case for making the areas fully protected marine reserves as they meet many of the key criteria 
adopted by the CBD for identifying priority areas for protection. 
 
The closure of the four high seas pockets (see figure 1) to all forms of fishing would also complement 
and strengthen initiatives and measures in adjacent Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZs), in particular 
recently established marine reserves and protected areas in a number of Pacific Island Countries.10   
In addition, the Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA) have, as a condition of its licensing 
arrangements, closed off a large area of international waters including the high seas pockets to purse 
seine fishing.11  
 
Pacific Island leaders called for the further closure of high seas pocket three (Eastern High Seas 
Pocket see figure 1; Pocket 3) in a bid to tackle overfishing and Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated 
(IUU) fishing activities at the Forty Third Pacific Island (Leaders) Forum held this year in the Cook 
Islands.12 The loss from IUU fishing in the Western and Central Pacific (WCPO) region has been 
estimated to be in the vicinity of 21-46% of reported catch and is valued at US $0.7 - $1.5 billion.13 
Greenpeace ship expeditions in 200614, 200815, 200916, and 201117 repeatedly demonstrated the 
extensive and pernicious nature of IUU fishing in the region and the role that these high seas areas 
play in facilitating these illegal activities.  According to the Eastern High Seas Pocket (EHSP) Analysis 
by Cook Islands, the EEZs adjacent to the EHSP have experienced several IUU cases over the past ten 
years.18 The pocket is a major entry and exit point for its EEZ and it was being used as a platform for 
IUU fishing activity being carried out in its waters. Data from Vessel Monitoring Systems (VMS) under 
CMM 2010-0219 revealed that many of the vessels operating in the EHSP and other international 
waters are not reporting to the Commission and these vessels are operating in these waters without 
being monitored by anybody. 
 
Furthermore, increased migration of longline capacity from the Indian Ocean and North Pacific to 
both tropical tuna fisheries (i.e. bigeye and yellowfin) and to the southern albacore fishery is placing 
additional stress on the stocks and adjacent economies. These vessels operating solely on the high 
                                                           
9  Available at http://www.greenpeace.to/publications/Pacific-CBD-report-August-2009.pdf     
10 Pacific Islands Marine Portal, Marine Protected Area. Available at 
http://www.pimrisportal.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=71&Itemid=65   
11 PNA Amended Third Implementing Arrangement (3IA) 
12 Forum Communique (Paragraph 23). Forty-Third Pacific Islands Forum Rarotonga, Cook Islands 28 - 30 
August 2012. Available at http://www.forumsec.org/pages.cfm/documents/forum-communiques/ 
13 MRAG and University of British Columbia (2008) The Global Extent of Illegal Fishing, April.  Available at  
www.mrag.co.uk/Documents/ExtentGlobalIllegalFishing.pdf  
14Available at http://oceans.greenpeace.org/raw/content/en/documents-reports/plundering-pacific.pdf  
15Available at http://www.greenpeace.org/raw/content/australia/resources/reports/overfishing/defending-
our-pacific-2008-su.pdf 
16  Available at  http://www.greenpeace.org/raw/content/international/press/reports/defending-our-
pacific2009-summaryreport.pdf 
17Available at http://www.greenpeace.org/international/Global/international/publications/oceans/2012/410-
DefendingOurPacific.pdf  
18 EHSP Analysis paper by Cook Island WCPFC-TCC8-2012-DP03 27 September 2012 
19 CMM 2010-02: Conservation and Management Measure for the Eastern High Seas Pocket Special 
Management Area.  
seas and flagged to Asian fishing powers are poorly regulated, highly mobile and have been 
documented operating in the high seas pockets and in high seas areas adjacent to EEZs. In a recently 
published report, it was shown that a closure of the high seas pockets three and four and an 
additional area of high seas immediately north of Cook Islands EEZ (see figure 1) to longline fishing, 
while also banning FADs, would have a tremendous conservation benefit on bigeye stocks.20 
 
Domestic longline fleets have indicated their concern over international fleets operating solely on 
the high seas and using these pockets as platforms to tranship catch out of the region. This also 
underlines the continued need to ban all at sea transhipments. Unreported fishing resulting from at 
sea transhipments causes economic harm to the region as well as undermines the scientific analysis 
and management effort in the region. 
 
Greenpeace believes that the decision to reopen the pockets at the WCPFC8 was a very short-sighted 
mistake. The opening of the high seas pockets also came with a number of pre-conditions including 
the need for better monitoring of fleets and strict implementation of and compliance with 
monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS) measures. The reporting on compliance by flag States at 
the recent the TCC8 revealed that the pre-conditions for reopening the closures are not being met.   
 
The benefits of area closures often take several years to detect and need to be complemented with 
appropriate action to take care of displaced effort. Area closures also need to be coupled with other 
management measures to decrease overfishing and hence any argumentation that the closures are 
not an effective conservation measure is based on rushed and short-sighted interpretations and 
influenced by vested interests to maintain high seas freedom and gain short term economic benefits 
from the areas. Moreover it should be noted the Pacific high seas pockets are not ordinary high seas, 
they are high seas enclaves and should as such be treated as special. 
 
Greenpeace is calling on WCPFC9 to close all 4 high seas pockets to all forms of fishing, as part of a 
new measure for skipjack, yellowfin and bigeye. The closure of the four high seas pockets to all 
fishing must be made a permanent measure, in order to strengthen the benefits derived from existing 
closures, complement initiatives to create a network of marine reserves in adjacent waters, and to 
eradicate IUU fishing. 
 
Unsustainable Tuna Lures – Why a ban on Fish Aggregation Devices (FADs) must be implemented  
FADs have increased purse seine catches of skipjack and juvenile bigeye and yellowfin tunas and are 
not a sustainable means of purse seine fishing because of the high catch rate of juvenile tunas and 
the significant levels of by-catch of other species including vulnerable species of sharks. The 
difference between the composition of a catch between FAD associated and free schooling tuna is 
dramatic.21  Juvenile fish are found in higher numbers in FAD associated sets including juvenile 
bigeye. 
 
It is clear that banning the use of FADs is an effective conservation measure. As illustrated during the 
temporary FAD-ban months (July – September) total catch was below average during the FAD ban 
periods. Purse seine catch of bigeye tuna was significantly reduced during these closure periods 
compared to other months of those years when the ban was in effect.  However, total purse seine 
effort had increased despite the two and three month closures, to a record high in 2011 since purse 
                                                           
20 Siberta, J., Senina, I., Lehodey, P., & Hampton, J. (2012, October). Shifting from marine reserves to maritime 
zoning for conservation of Pacific bigeye tuna (Thunnus obesus). Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America. 
21 Miquel, A. Delgado de Mol Molina, J. Ariz, R. Delgado de Molina1, S. Déniz, N. Díaz, M. Iglesias, J.C. 
Santana y P. Brehmer 2006, Acoustic Selectivity in Tropical Tuna (Experimental Purse-seine Campaign 
in the Indian Ocean) WCPFC-SC2-2006/FT WP-8. 
seine vessels would make up for time lost during the FAD ban months thereby undermining any 
conservation gains from the closure months.  It is clear from the preliminary results that FAD bans 
are effective for the time that they are in effect. Given the scientific recommendations for bigeye 
mortality reductions22, and the recommendations above from the Scientific Committee (SC) clearly 
pointing to increasing limitations on FAD use in the purse seine fishery, it is clear that the WCPFC 
urgently needs to extend the FAD ban measure for bigeye as an effective means of reducing the 
mortality of this species. 
 
The adoption and implementation of a complete year-round ban on the use of FADs in association 
with purse seine fishing would go a long way to help address excess fishing capacity, reduce catches 
of juvenile bigeye and yellowfin tuna, and reduce by-catch of other vulnerable species including 
oceanic whitetip and silky sharks.  
 
A recently published report revealed that a ban on FADs and/or shift of FAD purse seine effort to 
‘free’ schools as well as the removal of longline fishing from known bigeye spawning areas would 
have a beneficial effect on the bigeye population.23  
 
To have a fighting chance to avoid the severe overfishing and further depletion and future collapse of 
 bigeye tuna, Greenpeace is calling on the Commission to implement a full and permanent ban on the 
use of all FADs in association with purse seine fishing. 
 
Closing the Loopholes for Pirate Fishers – Why all at-sea transhipments must be banned  
Evidence from the recent TCC8 continues to show how transhipment at sea plays an integral role in 
laundering illegally caught fish.  Fish caught in an area can be transferred to another vessel at sea, 
and not be landed until the catch is far from the vessel that caught it and the fishing grounds in 
which it was caught. This enables vessels to hide illegal catch, catch much greater amounts than they 
report, or catch fish in one area and report it as caught in another. Under WCPFC current 
transhipment rules, fishing vessels are required to notify the secretariat if transhipping tuna; 
however, evidence shows that this is not taking place and that a large number of transhipments are 
occurring on the high seas in direct contravention of the Commission’s rules. Transhipment and 
bunkering at sea are supporting the plunder of the region’s tuna stocks. Given the inadequate 
capacity of the Commission VMS system to monitor high seas activities, a more effective solution 
must be put in place.  
  
Greenpeace calls on all CCMs and CNMs of the WCPFC to ban all at-seas transhipments and to 
alternatively require transhipments in port in order to close the net on IUU fishing in the WCPFC 
convention area. 
 
Capacity Migration - Why effort for southern albacore must be immediately halted   
Greenpeace notes with concern the increasing number of small to medium scale longliners migrating 
to the WCPO from the Indian Ocean and Northern Pacific. Of particular concern are those vessels 
operating only on the high seas. These vessels place a severe burden on already fragile tuna stocks 
and contribute very little to the economies of adjacent Pacific coastal states.  
 
Given that they operate only on the high seas, have limited vessel monitoring system and observer 
coverage and are highly mobile and supported by at sea transhipments – these vessels are prone to 
IUU fishing. Greenpeace reiterates its concern over the increasing longline capacity and effort 
                                                           
22   SC (2011). Summary Report. Seventh Regular Session of the Science Committee, WCPFC. 9–17 August 2011, 
Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia. Available at http://www.wcpfc.int/node/3961  
23  (see 21.) 
particularly in the southern albacore fishery. Poorly regulated fleets operating solely on the high seas 
are placing increasing and possibly excessive pressure on a fishery that is integral to the fledgling 
economies of the small island Pacific states that this Commission is obligated to consider in managing 
the stock.  High seas longline vessels in the albacore fishery are competing with domestic and locally-
owned fleets and undermine the development rights of small island coastal State members that are 
safeguarded by the WCPFC convention. Although albacore stocks are seen as healthy, stock 
assessments have consistently cautioned against further increases in catch on the basis that they 
would reduce vulnerable biomass (larger adults) and therefore decrease catch rates and profitability. 
Despite these warnings, both catch and effort have increased significantly in recent years. Stock 
assessments have shown reductions in spawning biomass.  
 
Given the dependence of coastal states and absence of appropriate data on the stock Greenpeace 
urges the Commission to immediately halt any further increases in catch and effort for the southern 
albacore fishery until precautionary limits are established.  
 
Taking the bite out of shark finning 
Greenpeace fully supports the FFA proposal to amend CMM 2010-07 to improve the conservation 
and management of sharks to a complete ban on shark finning at sea through a fins naturally 
attached approach. This approach is recommended internationally as the best practice to improve 
data gathering and identification of shark catches, create a disincentive to targeting and killing sharks 
for their fins alone, and to ensure compliance. It is the approach recommended by the Convention 
on Migratory Species through its MOU on Sharks, which is now supported by 50 countries 
internationally.  The status and health of these species is currently unknown however it is estimated 
that shark populations have declined by as much as 70 to 80 percent and that 30 percent of all shark 
species are threatened or near-threatened with extinction. 
   
Greenpeace draws the Commissions attention to recent decisions by several of its Pacific Island 
members and territories to ban altogether commercial shark finning including possession, sale and 
distribution and to create shark sanctuaries that outlaw unconditionally the targeting of sharks. A 
number of other Pacific Island countries are in the process of creating shark sanctuaries and or 
strengthening legislation to ban the commercial exploitation of sharks.  
 
Greenpeace is calling on the Commission to place an unconditional ban on commercial shark finning 
in the WCPO through a requirement that sharks be landed with fins naturally attached in a bid to 
safeguard the future of one of the oceans oldest known species and to support the efforts of those 
member countries that have already created shark havens in their waters.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Map of high seas pockets 1 – 4; High seas enclaves require speacial attention under 
international law. 
 
 
