1 
 
 
 
COMMISSION 
FIFTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA 
10 – 14 December 2018 
STATEMENT TO WCPFC15 
WCPFC15-2018-OP20 
14 December 2018 
 
North Pacific Fisheries Commission (NPFC) 
North Pacific Fisheries Commission 
 
   2nd Floor Hakuyo Hall 
Tokyo University of Marine Science and Technology 
4-5-7 Konan, Minato-ku, Tokyo 
108-8477 JAPAN 
TEL 
+81-3-5479-8717 
FAX 
+81-3-5479-8718 
Email secretariat@npfc.int 
Web 
www.npfc.int 
 
Observer Statement  
North Pacific Fisheries Commission (NPFC) 
By Dae-Yeon Moon, Executive Secretary 
 
Good morning,  
Ms Rhea Moss-Christian, Chair of WCPFC, Mr. Feleti Teo, Executive Director, distinguished 
delegates, observers and ladies and gentlemen. 
 
On behalf of the North Pacific Fisheries Commission, I would like to extend our sincere 
appreciation to members of WCPFC and the Executive Director for inviting the North Pacific 
Fisheries Commission to attend the 15th Regular Session of WCPFC as an observer.   
 
As some participants may recall, I used to be a regular member to the Scientific Committee 
meetings and sometimes to the Commission meeting of WCPFC as part of Korean delegation since 
the beginning of the negotiation period back in 1994 and until 2008.  So I am very happy to come 
back and it is a great pleasure to be here with my old friends and colleagues. 
 
Since this is the first time for the NPFC to attend the WCPFC meeting, please allow me to present 
a brief introduction of our organization to the participants.  The North Pacific Fisheries 
Commission was established by the Convention on the Conservation and Management of High Seas 
Fisheries Resources in the North Pacific Ocean which entered into force on 19 July 2015.  
 
The Convention objective is to ensure the long-term conservation and sustainable use of the 
fisheries resources in the Convention Area (CA) while protecting the marine ecosystems of the 
North Pacific Ocean in which these resources occur. Currently we have the following Members: 
Canada, China, Japan, Korea, Russia, Chinese Taipei, USA and Vanuatu. Our mandated fisheries 
resources include all marine species caught by fishing vessels within the CA in accordance with 
Article 1 paragraph h of our Convention which by the way, excludes the species already covered 
by pre-existing international fisheries management instruments.  
 
Although we are only in our fourth year we have the basic conservation and management measures 
to commence our management exercise, namely Vessel Registration, IUU vessel listing, 
transshipment procedures, procedures to address vessels without nationality, measures for the 
management of bottom fisheries and protection of vulnerable marine ecosystems, limitation on 
 
2 
fishing effort for Pacific saury and chub mackerel, and high seas boarding and inspection procedures.  
 
In addition, we have established a data management system, developing a regional VMS, begun 
stock assessments of our priority species, developed a NPFC IUU vessel list for 2017 and 2018, are 
preparing to launch HSBI in early next year, and are progressing on the implementation of various 
compliance tools.  
 
Cooperation with relevant international organizations is part of our mandate according to our 
Convention, and promoted by our Members.  We are already establishing formal linkages of 
cooperation with NPAFC and PICES, and following on from the direction of our Members we are 
working with FAO, UN and other organizations including civil society to enhance our science and 
compliance capabilities.  
 
We know that WCPFC, with its 20 years of exemplary management experience, can greatly assist 
NPFC in its development and we look forward to more formal discussions for cooperation that will 
be mutually beneficial for both Commissions to deter and eliminate IUU fishing in our overlapping 
convention areas.  
 
As you are well aware, IUU fishing has become one of the key issues for RFMOs to address and 
NPFC Members were very concerned at what they perceived as a high level of IUU fishing in the 
NPFC Convention area and took an aggressive stance on this matter by endorsing the first IUU 
fishing vessel list in 2017.  In this regard, we look forward to taking advantage of the vast 
experience of WCPFC as we build our compliance system and to establishing such linkages in the 
very near future.   
 
Taking this opportunity, I wish to express our sincere thanks to Executive Director for accepting 
one of our Staff to the WCPFC Secretariat for short-term training to learn its advanced operation 
system. I would like to thank him for providing the services of Sam Taufao, your ICT Manager to 
assist us in establishing our data management system and compliance scheme.  
 
I would like to invite representatives of the WCPFC to participate in our 5th Annual Meetings of 
the Commission, which will take place in Japan during 11-18 July 2019. During the meetings, our 
Members will discuss cooperation with other organizations, consequently, we look forward to a 
representative from the WCPFC to assist us to facilitate such future cooperation. 
 
Finally, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the USA for hosting this meeting at a 
beautiful city of Honolulu as well as for the great hospitality.  Thank you very much. 
 
