 
COMMISSION 
TWELFTH REGULAR SESSION 
Bali, Indonesia  
3 - 8 December 2015 
 
AMERICAN FISHERMEN’S RESEARCH FOUNDATION STATEMENT TO 
WCPFC12 
 
WCPFC12-2015-OP13 
1 December 2015 
 
 
 
 
Paper by American Fishermen’s Research Foundation 
 
 
 
AFRF DIRECTORS
‘2015'
Kevin McClain
Bumble Bee Seafoods
Kevin Bixler
Chicken of the Sea
John Zuanich (Alt)
Tri Marine
International
Anthony Vuoso
Tri-Marine
International
Pierre Marchand
Ilwaco Fish Company
Bill Carvalho
Wildplanet, Inc.
Larz Malony
Pacific Seafoods
Christa Svensson
Bornstein Seafood
Wayne Moody
WFOA
Harvey Cosky
WFOA
John LaGrange
WFOA
Lewis Hill
WFOA
Rick Goche
WFOA
Karl Johnson
WFOA
Shawn Ryan
WFOA
Barry Nelson
WFOA
American Fishermen’s Research Foundation
P.O. Box 992723
Redding, CA 96099
(530) 229-1097
(530) 232-0107
E-Mail: <wfoa@charter.net>
November 27, 2015
Mr. Feleti P. Teo OBE
Executive Director
WCPFC
P.O.Box 2356
Kolonia, Pohnpei State 96941
Federated States of Micronesia
Dear Mr. Feleti Teo:
This letter is submitted on behalf of the American Fishermen’s Research
Foundation, (AFRF), which is, and has been, an accredited Observer Delegation
since the beginning of the Commission.  This letter is addressed to all the
Delegates to the Twelfth Regular Session of the Western and Central Pacific
Fisheries Commission.  By way of background, AFRF is funded by the Western
Fishboat Owners’ Association, (WFOA), which represents over 300 vessel owners,
crew, and their supporters, who fish for albacore tuna in the North and South
Pacific using the troll and baitboat methods of fishing.  WFOA and AFRF,
working with the U.S. National Marine Fisheries Service, (NMFS) originated and
developed the troll fishery for South Pacific albacore.
In the initial years of the WCPFC, AFRF focused on promoting increased
cooperation between this organization and the Inter-American Tropical Tuna
Commission, (IATTC).  AFRF also brought tagging information in poster form to
this Commission from ongoing cooperative programs with NMFS. Then in 2005,
AFRF drafted and sponsored the first management and conservation resolution for
albacore in the IATTC.  Shortly thereafter, AFRF sponsored a similar conservation
and management resolution here in the WCPFC.
More recently, AFRF has worked to develop scientifically based limit reference
points for North and South Pacific albacore with a focus on collaboration between
the Northern Committee and the IATTC to develop compatible reference points
and harvest control rules for North Pacific albacore.    AFRF continues to support
the development of scientifically based target reference points and harvest control
rules for South Pacific albacore throughout the range of the species.
Page 1 of  2
This brings us to the current meeting of this Commission which will consider, inter alia, the development
of target reference points, harvest control rules for North and South Pacific albacore, and limiting the
fishery for South Pacific albacore.  Specifically, with regard to target reference points and harvest control
rules they must be based on good science.  They must also consider the health of the species throughout
its range, whether within or outside of the WCPFC’s management area.  However, we question how good
the science can be with the extreme lack of timely and complete data from several of the Asian fleets. 
Some way must be found to correct this situation which has gone on much too long.  Secondly, AFRF
suggests that the science provider for the Commission develop and utilize a Management Strategy
Evaluation (MSE) along the lines of what the Northern Committee has tasked the International Science
Committee (ISC) to perform for North Pacific albacore.  It appears that this is the course the WCPFC is
on from the preliminary meetings which are being held.  After this evaluation occurs it will be possible to
set rational target reference points and harvest control rules. 
Finally, while AFRF recognizes that something must be done immediately to curtail the greatly increased
and subsidized Asian upswing in targeting South Pacific albacore, in violation of current conservation
and management measures, closing the high seas to the U.S. troll fishery is completely inappropriate. 
The scientific consultants for the WCPFC have repeatedly stated that the troll fishery for South Pacific
albacore has no impact on the stock (see e.g. WCPFC9-2012-IP11).  This healthy and environmentally
sustainable fishery was originated, developed, and pursued by the U.S. albacore troll fleet.  There is no
justification for eliminating it.  
Sincerely,
John LaGrange,
President, American Fishermen’s Research Foundation    
Page 2 of  2
