 
 
1
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
WWF-TRAFFIC POSITION STATEMENT TO WCPFC-4 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Recognizing that the WCPFC is now in its fourth year of existence, WWF and TRAFFIC 
believe that the time for action is now in collectively agreeing to and implementing 
conservation and management measures for the sustainable exploitation of the Pacific’s 
tuna resources. The concern over the decline in some of our important tuna species is 
not fully reflected in the management of fishing behavior. We recognize that there are 
severe limitations to the capacity of many CCMs, however we must also recognize that 
our inaction will make a mockery of our ability to take firm decisions and implement 
them when they matter most. The level of actions undertaken by the Commission over 
the last 4 years does not reflect the seriousness of the declining tuna stocks.  
 
WWF and TRAFFIC acknowledge the outcomes relating to sustainable tuna management 
arising out of meetings prior to WCPFC-4. They include among others, the 38th Pacific 
Islands Forum, Nuku’alofa, Tonga (Oct. 2007); the WCPFC secretariat contribution to 
the Joint Meeting of Tuna Regional Fisheries Management Organizations, Kobe, Japan 
(Jan. 2007); Forum Fisheries Committee meeting, Wellington, New Zealand (May 2007); 
and the meetings of the subsidiary committees of the WCPFC. 
 
WWF and TRAFFIC urge the Commission to heed the advice of the Scientific Committee 
(SC) and the Technical Compliance Committee (TCC), and undertake the following 
actions: 
 
• 
REDUCTION OF FISHING MORTALITY 
WWF and TRAFFIC reiterate their support for the 2005 recommendation by the Scientific 
Committee that a reduction in fishing mortality of 39% is required to maintain the 
Bigeye tuna biomass at a level 20% above MSY; and a 26% reduction in fishing 
mortality on Yellowfin tuna is required to maintain biomass at 20% above MSY.  
 
• 
CATCH DOCUMENTATION SCHEME (CDS) 
WWF and TRAFFIC fully support the implementation of a Catch Documentation Scheme 
as a key priority for the WCPFC. We note the Report of the Joint Tuna RFMO Technical 
Working Group on Trade and Documentation which recommended that all tuna RFMOs 
adopt CDS schemes. A CDS is a transparent mechanism to track fish caught with a wide 
range of gears and practices from vessel to plate, providing a verification procedure on a 
near real time basis. We believe that a CDS measure will go a long way to combat IUU 
fishing. 
WCPFC4-2007-OP04 [Observer Statement: WWF-Traffic]
 
 
2
 
• 
TRANSSHIPMENT MONITORING 
WWF and TRAFFIC support a ban on high-seas transshipment as a measure to combat 
IUU fishing.  We support in-port transshipment provided all transshipments are subject 
to observer coverage and take place in designated ports.  We urge the Commission to 
develop its transshipment guidelines and encourage CCMs to work with the Commission 
on this issue. 
 
• 
FISH AGGREGATION DEVICES (FADs) 
WWF and TRAFFIC are concerned about significant bycatch of juvenile Bigeye and 
Yellowfin tuna, particularly by purse seine and pole and line vessels.  WWF and TRAFFIC 
call for collaborative research to focus on the following: solutions to FAD closures such 
as time area management strategies for FAD use; identifying hotspots of juvenile Bigeye 
and Yellowfin tunas; determining a regime for observer coverage and reporting; and 
encouraging the use of best scientific advice in the management of FADs. 
 
• 
ILLEGAL, UNREPORTED, UNREGULATED (IUU) FISHING 
The threat of IUU fishing looms particularly large in this area. In this context WWF and 
TRAFFIC are concerned that fishing vessels continue to contravene agreements made by 
this Commission and its members. 
 
WWF and TRAFFIC call on the WPCFC to implement robust sanctions against fishing 
vessels, support vessels, CCMs or cooperating non-member states that contravene any 
management measure. In fact, a full set of penalties agreed to by the members of the 
Commission must be put in place. 
 
• 
REGIONAL OBSERVER PROGRAMME (ROP) 
WWF and TRAFFIC recognize the challenges in implementing an effective and functional 
ROP, fully aware of the responsibilities of both the regional observers and vessel 
operators as specified under Article 28, and Article 3 of Annex III of the Convention. 
While the Commission is unlikely to agree to 100% observer coverage, which would be 
ideal, the Commission should nonetheless aim for coverage well above the 5% minimum 
initial level. We consider the 5% minimum initial level inadequate given the size of the 
Convention Area and the potential ecosystem impacts of fishing activities. WWF and 
TRAFFIC encourage a close collaborative effort between the SC and TCC recognizing 
that the role of the regional observer cuts across the tasks of both committees. 
 
• 
ALLOCATION 
WWF and TRAFFIC tabled a paper at WCPFC3 titled “Conservation implications of 
allocation under the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission.” We reiterate our 
stand with respect to allocation of fishing opportunities, calling for: 
(a) the Commission to establish a process under which allocation issues can be 
progressed in a transparent, methodical and objective manner; 
(b) rapid resolution of allocation of fishing opportunities; 
(c) the allocation system developed by the Commission to have in-built flexibility and 
review provisions, for example to take account of the aspirations of new 
members. 
 
WCPFC4-2007-OP04 [Observer Statement: WWF-Traffic]
 
 
3
• 
BY-CATCH MITIGATION 
 
° 
Sea Turtles 
WWF and TRAFFIC recognize that sea turtle by-catch in longline fishing operations 
continues to be a problem in the Western and Central Pacific. Already a range of 
progressive measures have been introduced globally including the use of circle hooks in 
place of j-hooks. 
 
WWF and TRAFFIC further recognize that while trials and experiments on the use of 
circle hooks to reduce turtle by-catch have been, and are being undertaken around the 
world, the use of circle hooks as a turtle mitigation measure in the WCPFC area may be 
undermined by their impact on sharks. While insufficient data exists on the by-catch 
levels in the Western and Central Pacific, WWF and TRAFFIC urge the Commission to 
undertake precautionary measures in the absence of such data.  
 
In addition, we urge that all member countries undertake research to determine the 
level of turtle bycatch in their fleets within one year and undertake within three years a 
program of trials with modified fishing gear and/or techniques to evaluate their 
effectiveness with respect to bycatch of turtles and catch rates of target species, and 
report back regarding data, activities and results to the SC and TCC.  
 
° 
Sharks 
WWF and TRAFFIC welcome the fact that the WCPFC have adopted a conservation and 
management measure that will become binding as of 1 January 2008. We are deeply 
concerned that the CMM on sharks exempts vessels under 24m, which represents an 
enormous number of vessels and catch of sharks. This exemption makes the CMM 
adopted by the WCPFC the weakest of all shark measures adopted by any of the tuna 
RFMO’s and hence WWF and TRAFFIC wish to see the exemption deleted at this 
meeting. Secondly we wish to see a quantitative demonstration that the shark catches 
that result after 1 January 2008 represent catches at sustainable levels. 
 
° 
Seabirds 
WWF and TRAFFIC were concerned at the outcomes of the seabird discussion at 
WCPFC-3 (2006).  We believe that the seabird bycatch mitigation specifications should 
be minimum standards, not mere guidelines. 
 
The outcomes of SC3 and TCC3 have shown that the following needs to be undertaken: 
- 
collaborative research must be encouraged on specifications that are not fully 
understood by CCMs 
- 
information and data sharing among CCMs 
- 
stop using guidelines and specifications as negotiating tools either to buy time or 
to stall progress in agreeing to specific measures; 
- 
fishers must be clearly informed regarding operation of the specification of 
seabird mitigation measures 
 
 
 
 
WCPFC4-2007-OP04 [Observer Statement: WWF-Traffic]
 
 
4
CONCLUSION 
History is already repeating itself in the WCPO.  As tuna populations in other parts of the 
world are depleted, fishing fleets are moving to the WCPO and are overfishing now.  
This Commission must be prepared to take the hard decisions to prevent fisheries 
collapse now. 
 
Although the WCPFC is still young relative to other RFMOs, WWF and TRAFFIC are of 
the view that some CCMs in the WCPFC have come in rich with experience and have the 
benefit of hindsight because of their involvement in other RFMOs. With the WCPO 
considered to be the last frontier for tuna, the decisions on CMMs for the WCPFC are 
critical. Lessons from other RFMOs must be learnt. 
WCPFC4-2007-OP04 [Observer Statement: WWF-Traffic]
