1 
 
 
 
COMMISSION 
FIFTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA 
10 – 14 December 2018 
POSITION STATEMENT TO WCPFC 
WCPFC15-2018-OP06 
29 November 2018 
 
Submission by International Game Fish Association  
 
 
 
 
 
International Game Fish Association 
 
 
 
   
300 Gulf Stream Way, Dania Beach, Florida, 33004 U.S.A. 
 
 
 
     
 Phone:  (954) 927-2628    Fax: (954) 924-4299 
 
 
 
  
 
 The International Game Fish Association is a nonprofit organization committed to the conservation of 
game fish and the promotion of responsible, ethical angling practices through science, education, rule 
making, record keeping and recognition of outstanding accomplishments in the field of angling.  
 
Email:  HQ@igfa.org   Website: www.igfa.org  
 
Recommendations to the 15th Regular Session of the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries 
Commission 
 
The International Game Fish Association (IGFA) is a non-profit organization that represents recreational 
anglers throughout the world. IGFA was established in 1939, has active members in over 150 countries and 
provides rules for ethical angling practices. Many of IGFA’s members target the highly migratory species 
managed by WCPFC, especially marlin, sailfish and spearfish (i.e., billfish) which are primarily caught and 
released.  
 
IGFA has great concern about how highly migratory species are being managed on a global level for 
recreational anglers. The lack of data and accurate reporting on billfish catch is of particular concern. As an 
organization that is committed to the conservation of game fishes, IGFA has deployed over 350 pop-up 
satellite archival tags in marlin around the world in the past seven years, many of which have been in the 
area under this organization’s purview. The information gained from this exercise is available to your 
scientific committee.   
 
Billfish 
 
Striped Marlin 
The IGFA’s primary concern for the 15th Regular Session of the Commission is the status of striped marlin.  
According to the last stock assessment (2015), the WCNPO stock has experienced a long-term decline in 
population biomass and the stock is currently overfished and experiencing overfishing.  Spawning stock 
biomass is estimated at 1,094 t, or just 39% of SSBMSY.  Fishing mortality on the stock is exceptionally 
high and the stock has been experiencing overfishing since 1977, with the exception of two years.  Current 
fishing mortality is 49% above that necessary to achieve FMSY.  Still, with the stock both overfished and 
experiencing overfishing, no target or limit reference points have been established by the WCPFC.  As 
such, a robust rebuilding plan for this stock is necessary. 
 
The Scientific Committee has noted that in order for the stock to rebuild, the catch needs to be reduced to 
less than 2,850 t.  Due to the severely depleted nature of the stock, the IGFA recommends that catches be 
limited to no more than 2,500 t to give the stock a reasonable chance of rebuilding and to take into account 
uncertainties with catch reporting.   In addition, the IGFA supports the Northern Committee’s 
recommendation that additional reduction scenarios should be explored if the probability of reaching the 
rebuilding target is not at least 60%.  The IGFA also strongly supports the Northern Committee’s 
recommendation to make developing a rebuilding plan for striped marlin a priority for the WCPFC.   
 
Black Marlin and Sailfish 
No formal stock assessments exist for sailfish and black marlin.  Better data collection is necessary for 
these species so that their true abundance can be accurately estimated.  
 
General Recommendations 
Although primarily a commercial bycatch species, billfish are highly sought after recreational species that 
are primarily caught and released.  Recreational fisheries for billfish also yield significant economic 
benefits at the regional level. As such, the IGFA recommends that all countries be required to report dead 
discards and use circle hooks in their longline fisheries to reduce fishing mortality and improve the survival 
of released fish. 
 
