1 
 
 
 
COMMISSION 
SIXTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea 
5 – 11 December 2019 
POSITION STATEMENT TO WCPFC16 
WCPFC16-2019-OP11 
29 November 2019 
 
Submitted by International Pole and Line Foundation (IPNLF) 
 
 
IPNLF POSITION STATEMENT 
 
16th Regular Session of the  
Western & Central Pacific Fisheries Commission 
Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, 5-11 December 2019 
 
 
 
Indonesian one-by-one tuna fishing © Paul Hilton & IPNLF 
The International Pole & Line Foundation (IPNLF) is an international non-profit working across
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
science, policy and the seafood sector to improve the wellbeing of coastal communities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
committed to environmentally and socially responsible one-by-one fishing methods. The Western
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Central Pacific has strong historical linkages to such fisheries, and many continue to play
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
important roles in Indonesia, Japan, New Zealand, the Solomon Islands, French Polynesia, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Philippines and Vietnam, among others. 
 
The Western and Central Pacific Ocean is home to the world’s largest tuna fishery, two of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
world’s largest pole-and-line fisheries, and many troll and handline fisheries supporting coastal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communities throughout the region. IPNLF would like to see management measures adopted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that safeguard tuna stocks and ecosystems so that one-by-one tuna fisheries, and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communities that depend on them, can flourish.  
 
International Pole & Line Foundation 
1 London Street, Reading, RG1 4QW, United states 
Registered charity no. 1145586 
info@ipnlf.org     www.ipnlf.org 
 
 
At this year’s Commission meeting, IPNLF encourages members, cooperating non-members and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participating territories (CCMs collectively) to adopt a number of conservation and management
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
measures (CMMs) that, together, will strengthen the framework for sustainable tuna fisheries in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Western and Central Pacific Ocean. Specifically, we urge progress in the following areas: 
 
•
Continue progress of harvest strategies for all major tuna stocks to ensure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sustainability while also recognizing the social and economic dependence of coastal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communities on fisheries harvesting shared tuna stocks. To this end, we expressly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
encourage the adoption of harvest strategies with equitable reference points and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
control rules for all target tuna stocks.  
•
Strengthen the management of tropical tunas​, in line with advice from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scientific Committee (SC), to avoid overfishing and secure continued opportunities for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
one-by-one fisheries (e.g. pole and line, handline and troll), coastal fisheries and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communities in accordance with the UN Fish Stock Agreement and the UN
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sustainable Development Goals. 
•
Improve the monitoring and regulation of fish aggregating devices (FADs) and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
purse seine supply vessels ​to better understand their impacts on fishing efficiency
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and inform future management. Regularly submitted information should include
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
set-history data, while a transparent, independent and harmonized control of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
operational (dFAD) buoy numbers should be implemented. 
•
Reduce
marine
pollution,
including
plastics
and
ghost
fishing
impacts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
associated with FADs which wash ashore and damage coastal habitats by setting a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
strict time-frame for implementing fully biodegradable materials in drifting FAD
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
construction. Also, ​ensure that FAD owners recover drifting FADs while at sea​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prior to beaching events, and use available information to inform aligned mitigation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
initiatives. Independent verification of the materials used in FAD construction should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be part of the process.  
•
Adopt measures that will effectively reduce bycatch and protect endangered,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
threatened, or protected species, including sharks, seabirds, cetaceans, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sea turtles​. A comprehensive shark measure, as recommended by the SC, should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be adopted this year and at minimum include: a rebuilding plan for oceanic whitetip
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
sharks, require a harvest strategy developments for all overfished shark species, and
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
require sharks to be landed with fins naturally attached. Additionally, prohibit the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intentional setting around, or retention of mobulid rays. Furthermore, setting a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time-frame to transition to FADs which does not use netting materials in their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
construction will greatly reduce impacts of ghost fishing on sharks and sea turtles.  
International Pole & Line Foundation 
1 London Street, Reading, RG1 4QW, United states 
Registered charity no. 1145586 
info@ipnlf.org     www.ipnlf.org 
 
 
•
Improve Monitoring, Control, and Surveillance in relation to longline fishing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activities to reduce illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing through the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introduction
of
100%
observer
coverage,
either
electronic
or
human,
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strengthening at-sea transhipment measures.  
•
Address effort creep by imposing strict monitoring and control on the use of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
any
aerial
means
to search for tropical tunas​, including aircraft, drones,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
helicopters or any other types of unmanned aerial vehicles. 
There are several proposals on the table for this year’s Regular Session which will advance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these key issues, and we hope common ground can be found. Progress across all of these areas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is needed, as more sustainable management frameworks will benefit every CCM, bring positive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
long-term returns to fishing communities, and minimise the risk of future fisheries collapse. We
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
look forward to working with delegates as well as with our ​Members to strive for the highest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
standards of sustainability and equity in fisheries management to reinforce the good work of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commission. 
 
 
Happy fishers and their catch © IPNLF 
 
 
  
 
International Pole & Line Foundation 
1 London Street, Reading, RG1 4QW, United states 
Registered charity no. 1145586 
info@ipnlf.org     www.ipnlf.org 
 
 
 
ABOUT IPNLF 
The International Pole & Line Foundation (IPNLF) works to develop, support and promote socially and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
environmentally responsible one-by-one tuna fisheries around the world. IPNLF’s ambition is to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contribute to thriving coastal fisheries, including the people, communities, businesses and seas connected
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with them. As a hub for sustainably-minded organisations, we use the influence of the market to forge
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
change through practical fishery projects and stakeholder cooperation. IPNLF membership is open to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
organisations involved in the one-by-one tuna supply chain. Allied with our Members, IPNLF demonstrates
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the value of one-by-one caught tuna to consumers, policymakers and throughout the supply chain.  
 
IPNLF was officially registered in the United Kingdom in 2012 (Charity 1145586), with branch offices in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
London, Maldives, Indonesia and South Africa, and a staff presence in Germany, Kenya, Netherlands and
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
St. Helena. 
 
Contact​:
​Debbie
Wirtjes-Lewis,
IPNLF
Marketing
&
Communications
Director,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
debbie.wirtjes-lewis@ipnlf.org 
 
Keep informed about the latest developments in one-by-one tuna fisheries through our website and by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
connecting with us on ​Facebook​, ​Twitter​ and ​LinkedIn​. 
International Pole & Line Foundation 
1 London Street, Reading, RG1 4QW, United states 
Registered charity no. 1145586 
info@ipnlf.org     www.ipnlf.org 
 
