 
 
Greenpeace International  
 
 
 
Web: http://www.greenpeace.org     
Ottho Heldringstraat 5  
 
 
 
 
Press Desk Hotline  +31 (0) 20 7182470 
1066 AZ Amsterdam   
 
 
 
 
General media Inquiries E-mail: 
The Netherlands 
   
 
 
 
 
pressdesk@int.greenpeace.org 
Tel: +31 (0) 20 5148150     
 
 
 
 
Press Desk Fax +31 (0) 20 5148156 
 
 
FOURTH REGULAR SESSION 
3-7 December 2007 
Tumon, Guam, USA 
OBSERVER STATEMENT - GREENPEACE 
WCPFC4-2007/OP01 
15th November 2007 
 
 
Changing course to safeguard our fisheries and our future 
Western & Central Pacific Fisheries Commission  
Fourth Regular Session: 3-7 December 2007, Tumon, Guam, USA  
 
December 2007 
The Vava’u Declarationi issued in October by leaders of the Pacific Forum Island 
Countries (PIF) called for regional solidarity among member countries and sought the 
urgent adoption of additional measures by the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries 
Commission (WCPFC) specifically to address over-fishing of bigeye and yellowfin 
tuna. The WCPFC must respond to this, and to the statements of deep concern at 
the state of Pacific tuna stocks. As a recently appointed observer to the Pacific 
Islands Forum, the WCPFC will be called to account for management of the tuna 
fisheries in light of Pacific leaders committing to seeking a progress report at their 
39th session.  
 
Greenpeace has in past briefings highlighted the decline and overfishing of the 
bigeye and yellowfin stocks and problems in addressing IUU activities as examples 
of ineffective management measures. It does not need to be that way. This 4th 
regular session of WCPFC meeting offers an opportunity to change course and adopt 
strong and binding measures to implement its mandate.  If we do not do this, we are 
failing in our duty to the Pacific, to our countries, our citizens and future generations.   
 
In the WCPFC and in other tuna Regional Fisheries Management Organisations 
(RFMOs), consensus decision making has resulted in lowest common denominator 
positions, allowing countries with the biggest commercial interest in the fisheries to 
prevent the implementation of measures needed to maintain sustainable fish stocks 
and profitable fisheries and to preserve the rich marine biodiversity of our oceans.  
The result is overfishing and other environmental impacts. We cannot allow this to 
happen any more. 
 
In order to protect our tuna stocks, the Commission must: 
 
 
 
 
 
- 2 - 
 
 
 
1. Implement a 50% reduction in tuna fishing effort across the entire WCPO 
sector based on the average of 2001-2004 levels and to take a precautionary 
approach and account for unknowns and uncertainties in the data.  
 
2. Ban all at sea transhipments, with no exemptions granted to any member 
countries. 
 
3. Establish a no-take marine reserve for species under the competence of the 
WCPFC in the enclosed high seas area bounded by Palau, FSM, PNG and 
Indonesia as a fisheries management measure set up as part of an ecosystem 
approach. A commitment must also be made to establish fully-protected no-
take marine reserves in all high seas ‘donut holes’ in the near future with clear 
targets and timelines for implementation.  
 
4. Establish a publicly available IUU vessel blacklist. Blacklisted vessels must 
be barred from any future fishing license in the Convention Area. 
 
5. Establish 100% observer coverage for the entire Convention Area. 
 
6. Adopt a single, centralised, tamper proof, VMS system with real time 
reporting that is required for all vessels licensed to fish in the WCPFC area 
(including the high seas areas. 
 
Since 2001, regional scientists have been warning that the WCPO stocks of bigeye 
and yellowfin tuna are under pressure. Yet to date, no concrete measures have been 
agreed or implemented to counter the decline of these two stocks.  Worse, the 
exploitation of bigeye and yellowfin stocks are far higher than the exploitation levels 
used as inputs to the management models used in these fisheries. This is because 
the high level of “unknowns” in the data used in scientific modelling and projections is 
compromised further by the rampant rates of illegal, unreported and unregulated 
(IUU) fishing occurring in the region.  
 
In the Vava’u Declaration, the Pacific Leaders stated their deep concern on the 
current state of Pacific fisheries and said that for the region there was an “imperative 
need for us to take immediate and decisive collective action to ensure that, within the 
next three to five years, we secure our peoples’ future livelihoods, regional food 
security, and environmental sustainability of our seas and their ecosystems.”  They 
called for a long-term strategic approach to tuna species in the Pacific to ensure that 
these resources are effectively managed so as to provide long-lasting economic, 
social and cultural benefits.  We must see the directives are followed through. We 
strongly emphasise that the Vava’u Declaration requires “urgent adoption of 
additional measures by the WCPFC to address over-fishing of bigeye and yellowfin,” 
including a reduction in longline catches and addressing purse seine fishing, as well 
as specific steps to reduce the catch of juvenile bigeye and yellowfin. 
 
For a period of seven weeks in 2006, Greenpeace undertook a joint surveillance 
exercise with the governments of the Federated States of Micronesia and Kiribati. 
With fisheries officers from these States, we boarded and inspected fishing vessels 
inside their respective EEZs. Our report ii “Plundering the Pacific” summarises our 
findings from the ship tour.  
 
We observed a range of irregular and unreported practices including that 80% of the 
vessels boarded had Vessel Monitoring System (VMS) problems and had failed to 
 
 
 
 
 
- 3 - 
 
 
notify the licensing coastal state that they were fishing inside their waters, or send 
catch reports. It was not uncommon for this joint enforcement task-force to inspect 
ships that had less than 200 tons of tuna on board when they had been at sea for 
over a year—a strong indication that transhipment at sea is extensive. One vessel 
was boarded which had been at sea for up to two years without submitting any 
verifiable records on the actual tonnage of tuna harvested during this period.  
 
This evidence provides us with first-hand experience of the extent of the problems of 
IUU fishing at-sea. It also points to certain management loopholes that still exist and 
need to be urgently addressed. Recently, Greenpeace has also observed numerous 
non-Commission member vessels still operating in the Convention area. In particular, 
vessels flagged to Panama and some Latin American countries are still operating 
both with and without licences.  Where they have been issued with licences, they 
should not have been. Vessels continue plundering the WCPO area because of the 
weak management framework and the availability of ports of convenience. The 
Commission will be called upon to be serious and fair in dealing with these.   
 
 
Keeping Pacific Solidarity firmly on the Agenda 
 
Agenda Item 4: Science Issues 
The Greenpeace briefing paperiii to the third regular session of the Scientific 
Committee meeting of the Commission in Honolulu outlined our grave concern 
regarding the status of the tuna stocks specifically the constant decline in the bigeye 
and yellowfin stocks and the use of the now discredited concept of maximum 
sustainable yield (MSY).  
 
Reports from Science Committee meetings SC1, SC2 and SC3 have been 
increasingly more pessimistic.  
 
SC3 this year concluded that the WCPO yellowfin tuna fishery can be considered to 
be fully exploited, that both the 2006 and 2007 assessments indicate that there is a 
high probability that overfishing of yellowfin is occurring, and that reductions in the 
fishing mortality rate are required to maintain average biomass at levels greater than 
5% above BMSY
iv.  
 
In 2006, SC2 found that models indicated that there is a high probability that 
overfishing of bigeye has been occurring in the WCPOv.   
 
While SC1 in 2005 the SC assessed that ‘overfishing is likely occurring’ and that 
reduction of fishing mortality is neededvi.  SC1 noted that the assessment moved 
from overfishing was ‘possibly’ occurring in 2004 to ‘likely’ occurring in 2005vii.   
 
The question must therefore be asked: if reductions are required, how can we fail to 
make those reductions? 
 
We also note the uncertainties in light of IUU fishing. Recent media reports of 
southern bluefin tuna from Australia illegally caught by Japanese fishers totalling 
billions of dollars serve as a warning.  Reported methods that were used to hide the 
overcatch include evasion of on-shore inspections, under-reporting of amounts 
caught, and importation as different tuna species, either trans-shipped at sea from 
foreign vessels or in containers.viii  Given these uncertainties and indeterminacies, 
the measures proposed to address this unsustainable fishery fall far short of what is 
necessary to assure that the current situation is checked and reversed.  The 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
- 4 - 
 
 
SC2ix recommendations in fishing of 25% for bigeye and 10% for yellowfin tuna not 
only have not been acted upon but are far below the reductions required in the 
application of a precautionary management regime.  The scientific work of fisheries 
organisations should be moving towards ecosystem based fisheries management.   
 
The Greenpeace Science report to the second regular session of the Scientific 
Committee in Manilla in 2006 outlined the scientific basis of the catch and effort 
measures needed to salvage the overfished bigeye and yellowfin stocks.  We must 
take account of and act on the high levels of uncertainties and indeterminacy.  
History shows that this is fundamental to ensuring that overfishing does not occur. 
 
Greenpeace therefore continues to press that the precautionary approach must be 
applied by way of a 50% reduction in tuna fishing effort across the entire WCPO 
sector.  
 
Pacific Leaders themselves have directed “the urgent adoption of additional 
measures by the WCPFC to address over-fishing of bigeye and yellowfin, including a 
reduction in longline catches and addressing purse seine fishing, and specific steps 
to reduce the catch of juvenile bigeye and yellowfin” given that the leaders were 
“seized by the scientific advice that over-fishing of two key regional tuna species –
bigeye and yellowfin tuna – now places stock levels in jeopardyx.”  
 
(1)  Agenda Item 6: Technical and Compliance Issues 
The Greenpeace briefing paper3 to the third regular session of the Technical and 
Compliance Committee (TCC) of the Commission in Pohnpei, FSM made 
recommendations on the proper functioning and implementation of Conservation and 
Management Measures (CMMs) of the Commission.   
 
On technical and compliance issues, Greenpeace recommends that the 
Commission: 
 
• 
Ban all at sea transhipments, with no exemptions granted to any member 
countries.  
• 
Establish 100% observer coverage for the entire Convention Area.  
• 
Urgently adopt a single, centralised, tamper proof, VMS system with real 
time reporting that is required for all vessels licensed to fish in the WCPFC 
area (including the high seas areas).  
• 
Immediately establish the Commission Fishing Vessel Registry as a matter 
of priority, with no extensions given to member countries that have yet to 
submit their vessel details.  
• 
Establish a publicly available IUU vessel blacklist. Blacklisted vessels must 
be barred from any future fishing license in the Convention Area.  
• 
Adopt a Port State Scheme that enables coastal states to exercise 
effective control over fishing vessels in their ports, regardless of whether 
the vessel is licensed to fish in their EEZ.  
• 
Establish an electronic catch and trade verification scheme.  
• 
Establish stringent boarding and inspection rules and sanctions for vessels 
found violating Commission rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
- 5 - 
 
 
 
(2)  Agenda Item 8: Conservation and Management Measures 
Greenpeace proposes refinements to the following Conservation and Management 
Measures.xi  
 
Record of Fishing Vessels and Authorization to Fish (CMM-2004-01): 
This measure is an important measure to combat IUU fishing in the Pacific and 
should be supported.  The Secretariat’s Information paperxii addresses this resolution 
in paragraphs 11-23.  
 
CMM 2004-01 establishes a record of fishing vessels and authorizations to fish. 
Paragraph A(1)(c) requires CCMs (Members, Co-operating Non-Members and 
Participating Territories) to ensure that fishing for tuna in the Convention Area is 
conducted only by vessels flying the flag of a member of the Commission. What this 
means is that vessels that are flagged to countries that are not CCMs  cannot be 
licensed by CCMs.xiii Vessels flagged to non-CCMs or CNMs (Co-operating Non-
Members) which operate vessels in the Convention area may be IUU.xiv The 
Commission addressed the issue of non-CCM flagged vessels by establishing a 
temporary register of carriers and bunkers. It is clear that if a vessel is not on the 
temporary register of carriers and bunkers, or added to the temporary register, then it 
would be in breach of CMM-2004-1.   
 
This measure also means that Pacific Islands States should no longer be licensing 
these non-CCM flagged vessels.    
 
Greenpeace therefore draws this to the attention of CCMs and calls on all CCMS to 
cease to issue licences to non-CCM flagged vessels which do not have a temporary 
exemption. 
 
Greenpeace opposes transshipment at sea for the reasons given above. 
Greenpeace also opposes bunkering at sea for similar reasons. Bunkering at sea 
allows IUU vessels to stay at sea longer and facilitates illicit transshipment and other 
evasion of port state controls.  
 
Conservation and Management Measures for Bigeye and Yellowfin Tuna in the 
Western and Central Pacific Ocean (CMM-2005-01 and CMM-2006-01): 
CMM 2006-01 recognises that the Scientific Community has recommended 
reductions in fishing, but does not follow up the recommendation with action. 
Focusing on FADs and juvenile bigeye and yellowfin tuna is nowhere near enough to 
protect the stocks. This must be addressed in Guam. We recommend a new 
measure to require proportionate reductions not at 2001 or averaged 2001-4 levels 
but at half those levels, taking into account the deep concern expressed in the 
Vava’u Declaration and for the reasons  discussed in this briefing paper.  
 
As far as FADs (floating platforms that seine fleets place on the ocean surface and to 
which tuna are instinctively drawn) go, the draft measure proposed by FFA Members 
does not go far enough. The proposed FAD closure is welcome, but the closure 
should be permanent.  In targeting skipjack schooling under FADs, seiners also catch 
large amounts of immature bigeye and yellowfin, who school together with skipjack 
as well as indiscriminately scoop up other associated marine life such as sharks and 
unwanted fish species.  
 
The volume of this bycatch is significant, given the smaller size and vulnerability of 
the bigeye and yellowfin stocks. The low-value/high volume skipjack fishery, 
 
 
 
 
 
- 6 - 
 
 
therefore, is undermining the more valuable, vulnerable and less resilient bigeye and 
yellowfin stocks as well as due to the fleet overcapacity and increased efficiency of 
catching tuna is putting the long-term sustainability of the entire fishery in jeopardy. 
Based on these concerns and the urgent need to reduce the global tuna catches 
Greenpeace believes that the use of FADs for industrial tuna fisheries should be 
universally and urgently banned. 
 
Conservation and Management Measure: Commission Vessel Monitoring 
System (CMM-2006-06): 
We noted in our report on our Pacific tour that 80% of the vessels boarded had VMS 
problems and had failed to notify the licensing coastal state that they were fishing 
inside their waters, or send catch reports. This shows that it is critical to get the VMS 
system right, and to address the inevitable attempts to evade it.  Licences must be 
revoked where vessels are found to have turned off or otherwise tampered with VMS 
systems and such vessels placed on the IUU list established under CMM-2006-09. 
 
New measures, other conservation requirements and procedural matters 
Among considerations that the Commission is due to discuss, Greenpeace would like 
to comment on the following measures:  
 
Transhipments 
The draft Conservation and Management Measure on Transhipment proposed by the 
Republic of the Marshall Islands (WCPFC4-2008/DP08) paragraph 1 proposes the 
ban of all transshipment operations of highly migratory fish stocks covered by the 
Convention at sea or on the high seas, should be supported by CCMs. However, 
Greenpeace does not support exempting any transshipment within the waters under 
the national jurisdiction of a CCM. We believe that such an exemption would render 
the measure open to abuse and evasion.  
 
There are obvious advantages for Pacific Island Countries in banning transhipment. It 
strengthens the traceability of fish caught, encourages the landing of fish and its 
subsequent reporting. It can contribute to the development of fishing industries which 
Pacific Leaders have affirmed as important.xv The banning of transshipments also 
increases compliance with measures and helps to reduce IUU fishing. 
 
Observers 
Greenpeace wishes to record its dismay at the TCC3 Summary Reportxvi. The failure 
to commit to even 20% observer coverage shows a low level of commitment to 
sustainability.   A 5% coverage rate is merely token.  As noted by a recent report,xvii 
partial coverage, defined as the ‘usual’ 20-30% coverage, may run into problems with 
bias, arising especially from changes in vessel behavior or the inability to cover all 
sectors of a fleet equally, and is therefore inadequate for compliance monitoring.  
 
100% coverage, such as is implemented in CCAMLR and NAFO is required for 
compliance monitoring and provides better data. Even so, true 100% coverage 
requires more than 1 observer per vessel: one observer may only monitor 30-70% of 
all hauls.xviii Unwillingness to commit to observer coverage is inconsistent to a 
commitment to sustainability and should be reflected in allocation decisions.  
 
Allocation 
It is time for the Pacific Islands to progress frank discussions about allocation. The 
overfishing of two important stocks is already occurring, and significant reductions in 
catch or effort will make allocation more difficult. Allocation can only work if PICs 
cooperate. 
 
 
 
 
 
- 7 - 
 
 
 
The mechanism for allocation must be one that serves conservation as well as 
sustainable use: allocation rights must be and are subordinate to the obligation to 
conserve. xix However, there is little incentive for conservation and resources are 
depleted without equitable allocation of rights.   
 
Going hand in hand with the allocation issue are access agreements and rights. It is 
critical that access agreements are negotiated multilaterally, so that sustainability 
which is the focus of WCPFC, FFA and other regional fora are not compromised by 
access agreements.xx 
 
Mandatory cohesion of measures 
The addressing of IUU fishing is critical to both the enabling of an accurate Total 
Allowable Catch (TAC) to be set and the avoidance of non-compliance with 
allocations.  
 
When integrated with related measures such as of observers, VMS and other 
MCSCE (monitoring, control, surveillance, compliance and enforcement) 
prerequisites, they all have an impact on the allocation process which gives further 
rise to equitable, sustainable and a robust Pacific fishery. 
 
No-Take Marine Reserves 
Forum Island Country Leaders had in October also committed “to the protection of 
high seas biodiversity and the conservation and management of non-highly migratory 
fish stocks in the Pacific Ocean”xxi. No-take marine reserves in the high seas 
enclaves that prevents the take of species covered by the WCPFC would be an 
important step towards achieving a fully protected marine reserves in the high seas 
pockets which can allow our ecosystems to breed and breathe. 
 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT: 
 
Lagi Toribau 
Oceans Campaigner  
Greenpeace Australia Pacific  
Suva, FIJI 
tel: 679-3312861/679-9922080  
email: lagi.toribau @fj.greenpeace.org 
Sari Tolvanen 
Oceans Campaigner  
Greenpeace International 
Amsterdam, Netherlands 
tel:0031655125480 
Email: sari.tolvanen@int.greenpeace.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 8 - 
 
 
 
 
FOOTNOTES 
                                                           
i The Vava’u Declaration on Pacific Fisheries Resources “Our Fish, Our Future”, in Pacific Islands 
Forum Communiqué, Thirty-Eighth Pacific Islands Forum, Nuku’alofa, Tonga, 16 -17 October 
2007. Copy at 
http://www.forumsec.org/_resources/article/files/2007%20Forum%20Comunique%20-
%20Tonga1.pdf 
 
ii http://oceans.greenpeace.org/raw/content/en/documents-reports/plundering-pacific.pdf 
 
iii Scientific Committee, Third Regular Session Summary Report, 13-25 August 2007 (SC3 Summary 
Report)At http://www.wcpfc.int/sc3/pdf/SC3%20Summary%20Report.pdf, paras. 11, 43.  
However we must note that MSY is obsolete as a management tool and that instead the 
approach should be to maintain or restore targeted populations of the tuna species to levels 
consistent with the precautionary approach while minimizing the impacts of fishing on 
associated and dependent species and the marine environment, protecting marine 
biodiversity and applying an ecosystem approach to the management of fisheries in the 
region.  The FAO 2006 Expert Consultation on deep sea fisheries said that: 
36. …adherence to the precautionary approach is required as a precondition for sustainable 
management of deep-sea fisheries and for deepsea ecosystems and biodiversity to be 
conserved and protected. Strategies that have been applied to manage deep-sea fisheries 
need to be evaluated in light of their poor performance to date, particularly for low-
productivity species. Regarding Annex II of the UNFSA, which specifies that the “fishing mortality 
rate which generates maximum sustainable yield should be regarded as a minimum standard 
for limit reference points” (Annex II, article 7), target reference points for the management of 
deep-sea species need to be set conservatively and well below maximum sustainable yield 
(MSY)-based reference points. In general, targets should be no greater than the estimated or 
inferred natural mortality rate, and preferably they should be less.  
Conclusions and Recommendations from the Expert Consultation on the International 
Guidelines for the Management of Deep-Sea Fisheries in the High Seas, November 21-23, 2006, 
Bangkok, Thailand. At http://www.iucn.org/THEMES/MARINE/pdf/ExpertConsul-Bangkok.pdf. 
Para 36. 
 
iv Report of the Scientific Committee, 13 October 2004, para. 4.7, 4.8. At 
http://www.wcpfc.int/sc1/scientific_committee.htm#Report  
 
v Scientific Committee Second Regular Session Summary Report: 7-18 August 2006, (SC2 
Summary Report), para. 7 and 146. At http://www.wcpfc.int/sc2/pdf/SC2_ExecSummary.pdf. 
 
vi Report of the Scientific Committee, 13 October 2004, para. 4.7, 4.8.   At 
http://www.wcpfc.int/sc1/scientific_committee.htm#Report  
 
vii SC1, 4.7. 
 
viii Japanese accused of hiding tuna worth more than $8b , Sydney Morning Herald, October 
24, 2007. Copy at http://www.smh.com.au/news/environment/japanese-accused-of-hiding-
tuna-worth-more-than-8b/2007/10/23/1192941065073.html 
 
ix See SC2 Summary Report, para. 9 (bigeye) and para. 14 (yellowfin). See also SC3 Report 
para. 58. 
 
x Vava’u Declaration  
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 9 - 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                      
xi Fifteen conservation and management measures and five resolutions relating to the 
sustainability of highly migratory fish stocks, mitigation of by-catch, elements of the 
Commission’s MCS Scheme and capacity reduction were adopted at the three preceding 
sessions of the Commission.  These were: 
Record of Fishing Vessels and Authorization to Fish (CMM-2004-01); 
Cooperating Non-members (CMM-2004-02); 
Specifications for the Marking and Identification of Fishing Vessels (CMM-2004-03); 
Conservation and Management Measures for Bigeye and Yellowfin Tuna in the Western and 
Central Pacific Ocean (CMM-2005-01 and CMM-2006-01); 
Conservation and Management Measures for South Pacific Albacore (CMM-2005-02); 
Conservation and Management Measures for North Pacific Albacore (CMM-2005-03); 
Conservation and Management Measures to Mitigate the Impact of Fishing for Highly Migratory 
Fish Stocks on Seabirds (CMM-2006-02); 
Conservation and Management Measure for Swordfish in the South West Pacific (CMM-2006-
03); 
Conservation and Management Measure for Striped Marlin in the Southwest Pacific (CMM-
2006-04); 
Conservation and Management Measure for Sharks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean 
(CMM-2006-05); 
Conservation and Management Measure: Commission Vessel Monitoring System (CMM-2006-
06); 
Conservation and Management Measure for the Regional Observer Programme (CMM-2006-
07); 
Conservation and Management Measure: Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission 
Boarding and Inspection Procedures (CMM-2006-08);  
p. Conservation and Management Measure to Establish a List of Vessels Presumed to Have 
Carried Out Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing Activities in the WCPO (CMM-2006-09). 
 
Resolutions 
Resolution on Conservation and Management Measures (CMM- 2004-04)  
Resolution on Reduction of Overcapacity (Resolution-2005-02); 
Resolution on Reduction on Non-target Fish Species (Resolution-2005-03); 
Resolution to Mitigate the Impact of Fishing for Highly Migratory Fish Species on Sea Turtles 
(Resolution-2005-04) 
 
xii WCPFC4-2007-13, Information Paper to support the Commission’s Review of Existing 
Conservation and Management Measures, http://www.wcpfc.int/wcpfc4/pdf/WCPFC4-2007-
13%20[CMMs%20Implementation%20and%20reporting].pdf. 
 
xiii In June 2006(WCPFC Circular 2006-03) the Commission Chair wrote to CCMs proposing a 
temporary waiver of this requirement until the Commission had an opportunity to consider the 
advice of the TCC2 WCPFC3 in December 2006.  At TCC2, the Secretariat reported that only 
two CCMs had responded to a request to provide a list of non-CCM vessels supporting the 
fishing operations of their fleets in the Convention Area.  TCC2 agreed that the information 
requested on non-CCM flag bunker and carrier vessels be provided to the Secretariat by 1 
November 2006 so that this information could be summarized and made available to WCPFC3. 
Only vessels on the lists submitted to WCPFC3 would be considered for a waiver. 
 
xiv See WCPFC Summary Report, Third Regular Session, 11—15 December 2006, Apia, Samoa (3rd 
Summary Report), para. 19. 
 
xv Vava’u Declaration.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 10 - 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                      
xvi Technical and Compliance Committee, Third Regular Session, 27 September – 2 October 
2007, Summary Report, at 
http://www.wcpfc.int/tcc3/pdf/TCC3%20Summary%20Report%20and%20Attachments.pdf. 
New Zealand proposed an interim observer coverage of 5% (para. 21). Australia suggested 
that 20% was appropriate (para. 22). Japan proposed to progressively build towards 5% 
coverage by 2014 (para. 24). China cited difficulties in committing to 20% coverage (para. 26). 
 
xvii Marine Resources Assessment Group for WWF,  “Observer Programmes: Best Practice, 
Funding Options and North Sea Case Study.”  (2006).  
 
xviii Op.cit, 22. 
 
xix M. Lodge and S. Nandan, “Some Suggestions Towards better implementation of the United 
Nations Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks of 1995,” 20 Int’l 
Journal of Marine and Coastal Law 345-380 (2005) 
 
xx In this connection, Pacific Leaders directed in the Vava’u Declaration that FFA, supported by 
the Forum Secretariat, must examine the potential for new multilateral Pacific regional 
arrangements patterned on the Niue Treaty Subsidiary Agreement model for exchange of 
fisheries law enforcement data, cross-vesting of enforcement powers, and use of fisheries data 
for other law enforcement activities.  
 
xxi Vava’u Declaration 
 
