 
 
COMMISSION 
 EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION  
Tumon, Guam, USA 
26-30 March 2012 
ISSF POSITION STATEMENT 
WCPFC8-2011-OP/03 
  
 
 
 
Paper prepared by ISSF 
 
 
	  
	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  ISSF	  POSITION	  STATEMENT	  
Presented	  during	  the	  8th	  Regular	  Session	  of	  the	  	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Western	  and	  Central	  Pacific	  Fisheries	  Commission	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Guam	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  26-­‐30	  March	  2012	  
	  
The	  International	  Seafood	  Sustainability	  Foundation	  (ISSF)	  is	  a	  global	  partnership	  among	  the	  tuna	  industry,	  
science	   and	   WWF,	   the	   global	   conservation	   organization.	   Our	   mission	   is	   to	   work	   toward	   the	   science-­‐based	  
conservation	  and	  management	  of	  tuna	  stocks	  and	  the	  protection	  of	  ocean	  health	  by	  supporting	  regional	  fisheries	  
management	   organizations	   and	   advocating	   for	   the	   recommendations	   of	   each	   organization’s	   scientific	   advisory	  
body.	  
	  
ISSF	  would	  like	  to	  thank	  the	  Western	  and	  Central	  Pacific	  Fisheries	  Commission	  for	  the	  opportunity	  to	  present	  this	  
position	  statement	  supporting	  decisive	  action	  based	  on	  the	  research	  compiled	  by	  the	  WCPFC	  Scientific	  Committee.	  
	  
	  
	  
BACKGROUND	  
	  
Bigeye.	  According	  to	  an	  updated	  assessment	  completed	  in	  2011	  and	  reported	  to	  the	  7th	  Regular	  Session	  of	  the	  
WCPFC	   Scientific	   Committee	   (SC7),	   the	   fishing	   mortality	   for	   bigeye	   tuna	   is	   well	   in	   excess	   of	   the	   maximum	  
sustainable	  yield	  (MSY)	  level	  (average	  F	  2006-­‐2009	  is	  about	  41%	  higher	  than	  FMSY).	  Analyses	  presented	  by	  SPC	  at	  
SC7	  indicate	  that	  CMM	  2008-­‐01	  has	  been	  unable	  to	  limit	  the	  total	  amount	  of	  purse	  seine	  fishing	  effort	  as	  intended.	  
While	  the	  catch	  of	  bigeye	  has	  been	  reduced	  during	  the	  months	  of	  the	  FAD	  closure	  in	  CMM-­‐2008-­‐01,	  it	  is	  evident	  
that	  such	  a	  seasonal	  reduction	  is	  insufficient	  to	  stop	  overfishing	  of	  the	  stock	  in	  the	  near	  future	  given	  the	  overall	  
annual	   level	   of	   fishing	   effort;	   other	   fisheries	   need	   to	   be	   limited	   as	   well.	   Projections	   made	   with	   alternative	  
management	  scenarios	  presented	  by	  SPC	  at	  TCC7	  indicate	  that	  closures	  of	  the	  entire	  purse	  seine	  fishery	  would	  
have	  somewhat	  greater	  conservation	  benefits	  for	  bigeye	  (although	  the	  catches	  of	  skipjack	  and	  yellowfin	  would	  be	  
reduced).	  	  
	  
Yellowfin	   and	   skipjack.	   The	   populations	   of	   yellowfin	   and	   skipjack	   in	   the	   WCPO	   are	   not	   estimated	   to	   be	   in	   an	  
overfished	  state	  nor	  are	  they	  being	  overfished.	  However,	  it	  should	  be	  noted	  that	  in	  the	  equatorial	  region	  -­‐	  where	  
about	  90%	  of	  the	  yellowfin	  catch	  is	  taken	  -­‐	  the	  stock	  may	  be	  fully	  exploited.	  For	  this	  reason,	  it	  is	  desirable	  to	  limit	  
fishing	  mortality	  on	  yellowfin	  in	  the	  western	  equatorial	  region.	  Furthermore,	  the	  skipjack	  continues	  to	  experience	  
high	   exploitation	   rates	   and	   several	   CCMs	   have	   expressed	   worry	   about	   possible	   range	   contractions	   if	   fishing	  
mortality	   were	   to	   increase.	   SC7	   recommended	   that	   the	   Commission	   consider	   developing	   limits	   on	   fishing	   for	  
skipjack	  to	  limit	  the	  declines	  in	  catch	  rate	  associated	  with	  further	  declines	  in	  biomass.	  
	  
	  
ACTION	  NEEDED	  	  
	  
1.	  WCPO	  Closures	  
	  
As	  stated	  above,	  it	  is	  clear	  that	  a	  seasonal	  FAD	  closure	  is	  insufficient	  to	  reduce	  the	  fishing	  mortality	  of	  bigeye	  to	  
FMSY	  or	  below	  in	  the	  short	  term.	  The	  WCPFC’s	  monitoring	  and	  observer	  programs,	  including	  debriefing,	  are	  not	  
sufficiently	   developed	   to	   ensure	   that	   the	   FAD	   closure	   is	   fully	   respected.	   Furthermore,	   the	   many	   exemptions	  
present	   in	   CMM-­‐2008-­‐01	   allow	   for	   a	   substantial	   amount	   of	   FAD	   fishing,	   and	   fishing	   by	   gears	   other	   than	   purse	  
seining	  contributes	  to	  overfishing.	  
	  
Recognizing	  this,	  ISSF	  urges	  the	  WCPFC	  to	  implement	  a	  complete	  closure	  of	  the	  purse	  seine	  fishery	  in	  lieu	  
of	  a	  FAD	  closure.1	  As	  indicated	  above,	  such	  a	  closure	  would	  have	  somewhat	  greater	  conservation	  benefits	  
                                                
1	  http://iss-­‐foundation.org/2011/01/15/resolution-­‐11-­‐02-­‐wcpfc-­‐purse-­‐seine-­‐tuna-­‐catches/	  
accrued	  to	  bigeye	  tuna	  and	  –	  particularly	  if	  coordinated	  with	  similar	  closures	  in	  the	  IATTC	  convention	  area	  
–	  increased	  ease	  of	  monitoring	  and	  control	  of	  the	  measure.	  At	  the	  same	  time,	  the	  longline	  fishery	  for	  bigeye	  
needs	  to	  continue	  to	  be	  capped.	  Further,	  ISSF	  urges	  individual	  participating	  States	  to	  collaborate	  with	  each	  other	  in	  
order	  to	  plan	  for	  a	  voluntary	  complete	  purse	  seine	  closure	  that	  will	  reduce	  fishing	  mortality	  on	  bigeye	  tuna,	  should	  
the	  WCPFC	  fail	  to	  adopt	  such	  a	  meaningful	  bigeye	  conservation	  measure.	  ISSF	  will	  revisit	  this	  issue	  at	  its	  next	  
Board	   of	   Directors	   meeting	   following	   the	   8th	  Regular	   Session	   of	   the	   WCPFC	   with	   a	   view	   to	   formulating	   and	  
adopting	   its	   own	   scientific	   conservation	   measures	   necessary	   to	   ensure	   the	   conservation	   of	   the	   bigeye	   tuna	  
resource	  in	  the	  WCPO.	  
	  
2.	  Transshipments	  at	  Sea	  
	  
ISSF	  is	  concerned	  that,	  if	  not	  properly	  monitored,	  at-­‐sea	  transshipments	  can	  create	  a	  fertile	  environment	  for	  IUU	  
fishing	   activities	   to	   go	   undetected.	   For	   this	   reason,	   ISSF	   has	   issued	   a	   conservation	   measure	   that	   calls	   upon	  
processors,	  traders,	  importers,	  transporters	  and	  others	  involved	  in	  the	  seafood	  industry	  to	  refrain	  from	  transactions	  
with	  purse	  seine	  vessels	  that	  transship	  at-­‐sea,	  including	  archipelagic	  waters	  and	  EEZs.	  
	  
WCPFC’s	   regulation	   of	   transshipment	   in	   the	   Convention	   Area	   allows	   for	   differences	   in	   the	   regulation	   of	  
transshipments	  between	  archipelagic	  waters	  on	  the	  one	  hand,	  and	  EEZs	  and	  the	  high	  seas	  on	  the	  other.	  In	  the	  
event	  that	  archipelagic	  waters	  of	  a	  WCPFC	  member	  are	  not	  covered	  by	  a	  comparable	  transshipment	  regulation,	  
ISSF	  urges	  States	  to	  take	  compatible	  measures	  to	  regulate,	  monitor	  and	  report	  transshipments	  in	  those	  
waters.	  	  
	  
3.	  Vessel	  Registry	  and	  Capacity	  Limitation	  
	  
The	   first	   step	   towards	   managing	   capacity	   is	   to	   establish	   limited	   entry	   via	   a	   closed	   vessel	   registry,	   after	   which	  
reductions	  in	  the	  number	  of	  vessels	  can	  be	  negotiated.	  In	  a	  fully	  exploited	  fishery,	  coastal	  states’	  rights	  to	  expand	  
their	   participation	   in	   a	   tuna	   fishery	   must	   be	   accommodated	   by	   mechanisms	   for	   reducing	   the	   participation	   of	  
others.	  
	  
ISSF	  calls	  upon	  the	  WCPFC	  and	  member	  nations	  to	  develop	  a	  record	  of	  tuna	  fishing	  vessels	  with	  unique	  
identifiers2	  (e.g.,	  IMO	  numbers),	  and	  to	  adopt	  a	  limited	  entry,	  closed	  vessel	  registry	  with	  an	  eye	  towards	  
ultimately	  reducing	  the	  number	  of	  fishing	  vessels	  to	  a	  level	  that	  is	  commensurate	  with	  the	  productivity	  of	  
the	  WCPO	  fisheries.	  	  
	  
To	  that	  end,	  ISSF	  supports	  both	  Japan’s	  WCPFC7	  proposal	  to	  limit	  further	  increases	  in	  purse	  seine	  capacity,	  and	  the	  
Kobe	   III	   call	   for	   a	   freeze	   in	   fishing	   capacity	   by	   developed	   fishing	   nations	   and	   creating	   mechanisms	   to	   transfer	  
capacity	  to	  those	  developing	  countries	  with	  aspirations.	  	  	  
	  
4.	  Continued	  Progress	  on	  Sharks	  	  
	  
ISSF	   recognizes	   the	   important	   joint	   efforts	   of	   the	   WCPFC	   Scientific	   Committee,	   Secretariat	   and	   SPC	   to	   improve	  
fishery	  statistics	  on	  sharks	  that	  would	  allow	  for	  their	  management	  by	  the	  Commission	  on	  a	  species-­‐by-­‐species	  
basis.	   ISSF	   encourages	   CCMs	   to	   make	   this	   issue	   a	   priority.	   ISSF	   strongly	   supports	   the	   SC7	   recommendation	   to	  
adopt	   mitigation	   measures	   for	   oceanic	   whitetip	   sharks	   in	   the	   Convention	   Area	   and	   blue	   sharks	   in	   the	   north	  
Pacific.	   	  In	   addition,	   ISSF	   urges	   the	   Commission	   to	   mandate	   that	   fins	   remain	   naturally	   attached	   for	   any	  
sharks	   retained	   onboard.	   ISSF	   is	   also	   asking	   all	   RFMOs,	   including	   the	   WCPFC,	   to	   adopt	   a	   prohibition	  
on	  deliberate	  purse	  seine	  setting	  around	  whale	  sharks.	  	  
	  
5.	  	  Reference	  Points	  
	  
Though	  seven	  years	  have	  passed	  since	  the	  Convention	  entered	  into	  force,	  the	  Commission	  has	  yet	  to	  adopt	  any	  
reference	  points	  in	  accordance	  with	  Article	  6.	  Despite	  some	  progress	  at	  the	  scientific	  level	  towards	  the	  study	  of	  
potential	   reference	   points,	   ISSF	   is	   disappointed	   with	   the	   lack	   of	   forward	   movement	   at	   the	   policy	   level,	  
highlighted	  by	  the	  TCC7’s	  inability	  to	  recommend	  any	  action.	  ISSF	  urges	  CCMs	  to	  give	  this	  matter	  a	  high	  
priority	  in	  2012.	  	  	  
                                                
2	  This	  includes	  participation	  in	  the	  global	  Consolidated	  List	  of	  Authorized	  Vessels	  (CLAV).	  
