 
 
 
 
FOURTH REGULAR SESSION 
Tumon, Guam 
3-7 December 2007  
STATEMENT BY OCEANA 
WCPFC4-2007/OP16 
7 December 2007 
 
 
Oceana is an international organisation dedicated to the study and protection of the world’s 
oceans. Since 2006, Oceana has been engaged in a major European programme to investigate shark 
fisheries with the objective of restoring and conserving shark populations through improved European 
Union (EU) fisheries policy. The data and photos Oceana gathered during its investigative activities 
reveal the scope of European Union fishing fleets operating worldwide and in the Western and Central 
Pacific (WCPO).  
 
European fisheries have traditionally exploited many small seafloor-living coastal sharks and 
skates, and have recently increased their exploitation of deep-water sharks. The largest European 
shark fisheries, undertaken by pelagic Spanish and Portuguese fleets on the high seas of the Atlantic, 
Pacific and Indian Oceans, are very poorly documented. Though these fisheries historically targeted 
tunas and swordfish, longline catches of oceanic sharks are as high as, or higher, than the catch of 
targeted species, suggesting that EU surface longliners now target sharks. 
 
Recently 96 EU fishing vessels have been authorized for access and fishing rights in the 
WCPO. Because of Europe’s influence on global fisheries and the importance of sharks in ocean 
ecosystems, we would like to share information with the WCPFC members regarding the trade of 
shark fins in Papeete (French Polynesia) by Spanish vessels and the IUU fishing of two Spanish 
longline vessels.  
 
Details about these cases can be found in a report, Oceana published today. The report, 
entitled Fishy Business, reveals how European Union fleets, in particular some from Spain, escape EU 
regulations by catching sharks in targeted but unmanaged fisheries all around the world. The report 
can be downloaded at http://www.oceana.org/europe/publications/reports/ . 
 
 
Additionally, we would like to share further information regarding other European Union shark 
fisheries operating around the world. We hope this information will be of your interest and helpful in 
strengthening global shark conservation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Forbidden trade of shark fins by two Spanish longliners in the harbour of Papeete 
and IUU fishing of European Union vessels 
 
A fleet of at least 17 Spanish longliners are operating out of the harbour of Papeete. According 
to a French Polynesian decree1 from April 2006, the trade, sale or purchase of any part of a shark in 
French Polynesia is prohibited, except that for shortfin mako sharks: "fishing for sharks and retention 
on board of all or part of the animal is forbidden, whatever the intended end use. However, the mako 
shark is exempt from this rule. Accidental catches of those species where catches and retention on 
board is not allowed must be immediately discarded."  
 
In its report entitled Fishy Business, Oceana reveals activities carried out by a Spanish 
longliner in the harbour of Papeete that compromise this regulation. The pictures published in the 
report show the Nuevo Josmaru, a 43-metre long modern industrial fishing vessel that is part of the 
Spanish surface longliner fleet, in the harbour of Papeete. The pictures show the Nuevo Josmaru 
unloading frozen shark fins onto a small truck and that local workers later unload them from the truck 
into a container, most likely to be shipped to Asia. The Nuevo Josmaru is a rather new vessel, 
constructed in 2000 with European Community aid; its homeport is Vigo in Galicia, Spain.   
 
Two other vessels using Papeete’s harbour to land their catches, the Nuevo Pleamar and the 
Mariane, are not permitted to fish in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean. These two vessels are 
not included on the record of authorized fishing vessels for the WCPF convention area. However, 
harbour information reveals that the Nuevo Pleamar and the Mariane called into the harbour of 
Papeete as recently as November 2007. According to the FAO definition, these vessels are carrying 
out IUU fishing.   
 
2. General description of the EU fishing vessels and their related fisheries 
on the WCPFC White List 
 
The recently published WCPFC record of authorized vessels includes 96 EU fishing vessels 
(48 longliners, 33 purse seiners, 12 gillnetters, 2 trawlers and 1 troll vessel) and 5 transport vessels 
that have  access and fishing rights in the WCPO. 
 
The WCPFC grants fishing rights essentially for the catch of tuna and swordfish species. 
However, more than 50 of the authorized EU vessels are actually involved in shark fisheries and target 
pelagic or deep-water sharks. 
 
Due to the scarcity of tunas and swordfish species, European Union longline vessels have 
been using those species’ quotas to target sharks in the world’s oceans, and as a result pelagic shark 
fisheries have boomed in recent decades. Shark fins are among the most expensive seafood products 
in the world and are exported to Asia for the preparation of shark fin soup. The European Union is the 
second largest elasmobranch fishing state in the world, with targeted shark fisheries operated by more 
than 200 modern surface longliners, and is also one of the largest shark fin traders in the world. 
European Union fleets reported 13% of global elasmobranch landings to the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in 2005. Today, Spain is the centre of the shark fin trade in 
Europe and is one of the biggest exporters worldwide of shark fins to Asian markets. 
 
Furthermore, the stocks of some European deep-sea shark species have massively declined 
due to the fishing activities of powerful fishing fleets, and scientists of the International Council for the 
Exploration of the Seas (ICES) have recommended a zero Total Allowable Catch (TAC) for these 
species.2 Deep-sea shark fisheries, and particularly deep-sea gillnet fisheries, were not managed 
before 2006. These vulnerable species were caught in great amounts so that their liver oil could be 
used in the cosmetics industry, producing a serious threat to their conservation. 
 
 
3. The necessity of efficient National Plans of Action for Sharks 
 
During the WCPFC third regular session, conservation and management measures were 
implemented for sharks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean. One of the decisions was that 
Commission Members, Cooperating non-Members, and participating Territories shall implement the 
                                                 
1 Arrete n° 396 CM du 28 avril 2006 portant inscription des requins sur la liste des espèces protégées de la 
catégorie B et modifiant le code de l’environnement de la Polynésie française. 
2 ICES Advisory Committee on Fisheries Management ICES CM 2006/ACFM:31 Ref. LRCReport of the Working Group on 
Elasmobranch Fishes (WGEF) 
FAO International Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks. National Plans of 
Action or other relevant policies for sharks shall include measures to minimize waste and discards 
from shark catches and encourage the live release of incidental shark catches. This conservation and 
management measure is binding as of 1 January 2008.  
 
Since 1999, scientific warnings of shark depletion have only intensified. The World Conservation 
Union (IUCN) now considers 20% of the world’s cartilaginous fishes assessed to be Threatened with 
extinction. The situation is even worse in Europe, where a full third of these species are classified as 
Threatened and no Shark Plan of Action exists. Targeted species, such as the spiny dogfish (Squalus 
acanthias), the porbeagle shark (Lamna nasus), and several deep-water sharks have been overfished to the 
point where they are now considered Critically Endangered in this region. 
 
A recent scientific paper presented to the Scientific Committee (WCPFC-SC3_EB SWG/IP-19) 
stated that only three of the shark species reported to be caught in the WCPO are categorized by the 
IUCN as Vulnerable. However, Oceana highlights the fact that in February 2007, expert findings of the 
Shark Specialist group of the IUCN revealed that this number is much higher. Even the widest ranging 
sharks are threatened by overfishing and more species are being added to the 2008 IUCN Red List.  
(See table below). 
 
 
IUCN Red list of Threatened Chondrichthyians, Shark Specialist Group, Feb. 20073 
 
Common Name 
Scientific Name 
IUCN Red List classification 
Sharks 
caught 
in 
LL 
+ 
PS 
fisheries  in 
WCPFC 
area, 2005 in 
tons4
 
Pelagic thresher shark 
Alopias pelagicus 
Vulnerable 
Bigeye thresher shark 
Alopias superciliosus 
Vulnerable 
Common thresher shark 
Alopias vulpinus 
Vulnerable 
1612 
Silvertip 
Carcharhinus albimarginatus 
- 
232 
Grey reef shark 
Carcharhinus amblyrhyncoides 
Near Threatened 
415 
Copper shark 
Carcharhinus brachyurus 
Near Threatened 
 
Silky shark 
Carcharhinus falciformis 
Least Concern 
6913 
Galapagos shark 
Carcharhinus galapagensis 
Near Threatened 
 
Black tip shark 
Carcharhinus limbatus 
Low Risk/Near Threatened 
97 
Oceanic white tip shark 
Carcharhinus longimanus 
Vulnerable 
3032 
Black tip reef shark 
Carcharhinus melanopterus 
Low Risk/Near Threatened 
292 
Dusky shark 
Carcharhinus obscurus 
Low Risk/Near Threatened 
 
Sandbar shark 
Carcharhinus plumbeus 
Low Risk/Near Threatened 
 
Sand tiger shark / Grey nurse shark 
Carcharias taurus 
Vulnerable 
 
Great white shark 
Carcharodon carcharias 
Vulnerable 
 
Gulper shark 
Centrophorus granulosus 
Vulnerable 
 
Leafscale gulper shark 
Centrophorus squamosus 
Vulnerable 
 
Portuguese dogfish 
Centroscymnus coelolepis 
Near Threatened 
 
Basking shark 
Cetorhinus maximus 
Vulnerable 
 
Frilled shark 
Chlamydoselachus anguineus 
Near Threatened 
 
Pelagic stingray 
Dasyatis violacea 
Least Concern 
3386 
Tiger shark 
Galeocerdo cuvier 
Low Risk/Near Threatened 
73 
Tope shark/ School shark 
Galeorhinus galeus 
Vulnerable 
500 
Sharpnose sevengill shark 
Heptranchias perlo 
Near Threatened 
 
Bullhead 
Heterodontiformes 
Least concern/Data Deficient 
24 
                                                 
3 IUCN Press release, 22.02.2007 More oceanic sharks added to the IUCN Red List, 
http://www.iucn.org/en/news/archive/2007/02/22_pr_sharks.htm 
4 Calculations based on : Moloney, Brett: Commonly captured sharks and rays for consideration of the ecosystem and bycatch 
SWG at S.C3C; SC3-EB SWG/IP-19 
Bluntnose sixgill shark 
Hexanchus griseus 
Low Risk/Near Threatened 
 
Shortfin mako. 
Isurus oxyrinchus 
Vulnerable 
Longfin mako 
Isurus paucus 
Vulnerable 
5.384 
Porbeagle 
Lamna nasus 
Vulnerable 
3386 
Giant manta 
Manta birostris 
Near Threatened 
 
Devil fish 
Mobula mobular 
Endangered 
 
Manta Rays 
Mobulidae 
Near Threatened/Endangered 
79 
Blue shark 
Prionace glauca 
Near Threatened 
40.958 
Crocodile sharks 
Pseudocarcharias kamoharai 
Low Risk/Near Threatened 
378 
Whale shark 
Rhincodon typus 
Vulnerable 
790 
Greenland shark 
Somniosus microcephalus 
Near Threatened 
 
Scalloped hammerhead 
Sphyrna lewini 
Endangered 
Great hammerhead 
Sphyrna mokarran 
Deficient Data 
Small eye hammerhead 
Sphyrna tudes 
Vulnerable 
Smooth hammerhead shark 
Sphyrna zygaena 
Low Risk/Near Threatened 
300 
Spiny dogfish 
Squalus acanthias 
Vulnerable 
 
 
 
Oceana recommends that the WCPFC prohibit access for all EU vessels targeting 
sharks until a Community Plan of Action for Sharks is implemented with the required measures 
to protect endangered species, manage commercialized species, reduce unwanted shark 
bycatch, eliminate shark discards and close any loopholes permitting the illegal practice of 
“finning” to occur. 
 
4. Targeted shark fisheries of Spanish and Portuguese surface longliners 
 
On the list of European Union vessels that have been granted access to the WCPFC area, 36 
Spanish and 3 Portuguese surface longliners are included. The longline fishery is renowned to target 
sharks and swordfish in the Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans.   
 
The main species taken by the Spanish and Portuguese surface longline fleet in the Atlantic 
are blue shark (Prionace glauca), swordfish (Xiphias gladius), mako sharks (Isurus spp.), thresher 
sharks (Alopias spp.) and hammerhead sharks (Sphyrna spp.). Due to uncontrolled fisheries and 
bycatches, thresher and mako sharks are considered globally Vulnerable by IUCN Red List criteria, 
and the scalloped hammerhead shark is considered Endangered. Furthermore, annual mako shark 
catches were estimated at 5,301 metric tons in 2005 in the WCPO (WCPFC-SC3-ST SWG/IP-2). The 
blue shark, the world’s most abundant and heavily fished pelagic shark, is considered Near 
Threatened. Scientists have noted declines of 50-70 per cent of this species in the North Atlantic. 
 
As in the Atlantic and the Indian Oceans, the Spanish longline fleet operating in the Pacific 
since 1990 has targeted swordfish and sharks. In 2005, Spanish longliners operating in the WCPFC 
area reported a total catch of 1,226.4 metric tons of swordfish and 1,603.7 metric tons of sharks and, 
in the last four years, shark catches have been much more significant than swordfish catches. 
 
* Please find more information regarding targeted shark fisheries of European Union surface longliners in Oceana’s report 
"Hunted for fins" http://www.oceana.org/europe/publications/reports/hunted-for-fins/ 
 
 
5.  The deep-sea gillnet fishery: targeted deep-sea shark catches 
 
On the list of the 96 European Union fishing vessels that have been granted access to the 
WCPFC area, there are 11 UK and 4 Portuguese flagged vessels employing deep-sea gillnets, 
although most of the boats belong to Spanish companies and operated out of Galician ports. Among 
other species, these vessels targeted deep-sea sharks in a deep-sea gillnet fishery in the North East 
Atlantic Ocean (NEAT).  
 
The unregulated use of gillnets in deep water is potentially damaging to deep-sea stocks due 
to excessive soak times and consequent high discard levels, and due to the long-term impact of lost or 
abandoned gear common in this type of fishery.  
 
Before temporary management measures came into force in 2006, the vessels involved in the 
NEAT deep-sea gillnet fishery, deployed more than 6,000 kilometres of fixed gillnets ('rasco' or 
anglerfish nets) every day to catch hake, anglerfish, king crab and deep-sea sharks. The catches of 
deep-sea sharks by these fleets, particularly Portuguese dogfish (Centroscymnus coelolepis) and 
leafscale gulper sharks (Centrophorus squamosus), have contributed to the depletion of these stocks 
which are currently on the verge of collapse. These vessels’ catches were neither controlled nor fully 
reported. 
 
The poor selectivity of these nets, together with the amount of time they are left in the water 
(the huge amount of nets makes it difficult for fishermen to bring them all in at one time, and the time 
that some of the nets consequently remain in the water can exceed several weeks), means that many 
of the specimens caught are rotten or in a damaged state when brought in. This has meant, for 
example, that up to 71% of the monkfish (Lophius spp.) catch had to be discarded. 
 
Another problem of these deep-sea gillnet vessels is the frequent discard or loss of their 
fishing nets. An investigation by fisheries scientists, published in the "Deepnet-report"5 of 2005 found: 
"The amount of fishing gear used in the fisheries, the lengths of the fleets, and the fact that the nets 
are unattended much of the time, make it very likely that a large quantity of nets are lost, while there is 
also evidence of illegal dumping of sheet netting. The vessels are not capable of carrying their nets 
back to port and only the headline and footropes are brought ashore while the net sheets are 
discarded, either bagged on board, burnt or dumped at sea. The total amount of loss and discarding of 
nets is not known, although anecdotal evidence suggests up to 30kms of gear are routinely discarded 
per vessel per trip." 
 
Due to the wasteful and destructive fishing practices of these vessels, the EU temporarily 
closed the NEAT deep-water gillnet fishery in December 2005. The temporary closure, which took 
effect on 1 February 2006, encompassed waters deeper than 200 metres to the north and west of 
Great Britain and Ireland. In January 2007, the deep-sea gillnet fishery was partly reopened with 
temporary measures restricting depth limit, maximum length and maximum soak time. The deep-sea 
shark fishery, which generally operated below 1,000 metres depth, was effectively closed due to the 
established maximum depth limit of 600 metres. 
 
* Please find more information regarding deep-sea gillnet fisheries of European Union vessels in the Oceana reports “The use of 
'rasco' 
gillnets 
in 
the 
anglerfish, 
king 
crab 
and 
deep-sea 
sharks 
fisheries 
in 
the 
Northeast 
Atlantic 
(http://www.oceana.org/europe/publications/reports/use-of-rasco-gillnets-in-the-north-east-atlantic/) and in the Oceana report 
"Northeast Atlantic Deep-sea Gillnet Fishery Management" (http://www.oceana.org/europe/publications/reports/northeast-
atlantic-deep-sea-gillnet-fishery-management/). 
 
 
6. Shark bycatch on European Union purse seiners 
 
A total of 33 European Union purse seiners (20 French and 13 Spanish vessels) are included 
on the list of authorized vessels of the WCPFC. Shark bycatch in purse seine fisheries is usually high 
and the main species observed taken in this fishery are the hammerhead shark (Sphyrna spp.), silky 
shark (Carcharhinus falciformis) and oceanic white tip shark (Carcharhinus longimanus).  
 
Several studies carried out on board French and Spanish purse seiners in the Atlantic Ocean 
have shown significant shark bycatch rates varying from 0.2% to 1.5% of total catches.6 Moreover, a 
recent assessment of shark bycatch in the tuna purse seine fishery of the Eastern Tropical Pacific 
Ocean (WCPFC-SC3-EB SWG/IP-3) shows that during purse-seine sets associated with floating 
objects on tunas in the eastern Pacific Ocean, high amounts of shark bycatch occur. Silky sharks are 
particularly associated with purse seine sets in the eastern Pacific Ocean. 
 
                                                 
5 Hareide, N., Garnes, G., Rihan D.,  Mulligan M., Tyndall P., Clarke M., Connolly P, Misund R., McMullen P. Furevik D.,  
Humborstad O.,  Høydal K., Blasdale, T. A preliminary Investigation on Shelf Edge and Deepwater Fixed Net Fisheries to the 
West and North of Great Britain, Ireland, around Rockall and Hatton Bank. 
6 A. Delgado de Molina, R. Sarralde, P. Pallarés, J.C. Santana, R. Delgado de Molina y J. Ariz. Estimación de capturas de las 
especies accesorias y de los descartes en la pesquería de cerco de túnidos tropicales en el océano atlántico oriental, entre 
2001 y 2004.  and   Hareide, N.R., J. Carlson, M. Clarke, S. Clarke, J. Ellis, S. Fordham, S. Fowler, M. Pinho, C. Raymakers, 
F. Serena, B. Seret, and S. Polti.* 2007. European Shark Fisheries: a preliminary investigation into fisheries, 
conversion factors, trade products, markets and management measures. European Elasmobranch Association. 
In a scientific paper about commonly captured sharks and rays for consideration in the 
ecosystem and bycatch working group of WCPFC, presented in 2007, it is stated that shark bycatches 
represent 0.2% of purse seine catches in the WCPFC area; this actually represents more than 3,000 
metric tons of sharks. In this paper, 16 different shark species were noted by observers as a bycatch 
in purse seine fisheries. Nearly all of those species are considered Threatened now according tothe 
IUCN red list criteria.  
 
While shark bycatch rates in the European Union purse seine fishery may appear low, they 
represent a significant amount for those threatened species. 
 
 
7. Landing sharks with fins attached: an efficient and proven measure to 
avoid “finning” 
 
In October 2006, an expert workshop7 focused on the European Union shark finning prohibition 
unanimously recommended the “fins attached” approach as the best means of preventing the illegal 
practice of finning (removing a sharks’ fins and discarding the body at sea). Requiring fins to be landed 
still attached to shark carcasses is a successful and efficient policy to prevent finning, and one that is 
already practiced by industrial shark fishing fleets in Costa Rica. El Salvador’s finning regulation 
requires that fins remain attached to the carcass by at least 25% of their base.  
 
In fact, only a fins attached policy would prevent "highgrading“- the practice of mixing bodies 
and fins from different species on board- and improve information on species and catches. Until a fins 
attached policy is adopted, it is imperative that the current 5% fin-to-carcass ratio is not increased. 
Indeed, it should be immediately clarified that the current ratio serves as a maximum and applies to 
the dressed weight of sharks (beheaded and gutted), not the whole weight. The current ratio applied in 
the European Union is 5% of the whole weight, which according to the IUCN permits a proportion of 
sharks caught to be finned and discarded.8   
 
In addition, the transhipment of shark fins should be forbidden, and shark bodies and fins 
should be landed together in the same port. Finally, a recent study reviewing the current fin to carcass 
ratio (WCPFC-SC3-EB SWG/WP-4) also concludes that in the absence of a clear and scientifically-
robust fin to carcass weight ratio, an alternative approach to reducing wastage and shark finning is to 
prohibit the removal of fins from the carcass prior to landing. 
 
* Please find more information regarding the necessity to land sharks' fins attached in the European Elasmobranch Association 
report. http://www.eulasmo.org/test2/documents/pdf/EEA_ratio_workshop_report.pdf 
 
 
8. Oceana’s recommendations for shark conservation in the Western and 
Central Pacific Ocean 
 
The WCPFC should ensure that the following management measures are taken into 
immediate consideration in the WCPO and recommend that they are included in members’ National 
and Community Plans of Action. The following measures should be established: 
• 
Establish a zero catch for elasmobranch species considered Critically Endangered or 
Endangered by the IUCN Red list; 
• 
Establish permanent technical measures for the deep-sea gillnet fisheries (maximum length, 
mesh size and fishing depth), require that nets be collected after 24 hours of deployment and 
prohibit vessels from leaving fishing gear unattended;  
• 
Implement preventative control measures to reduce the loss of fishing gear in the deep-sea 
gillnet fishery, including strengthening gear marking requirements, enforcing gear marking 
regulations and zoning of fishing activities, compulsory reporting of lost gear and retrieval 
programs; 
                                                 
7 Hareide, N.R., J. Carlson, M. Clarke, S. Clarke, J. Ellis, S. Fordham, S. Fowler, M. Pinho, C. Raymakers, 
F. Serena, B. Seret, and S. Polti.* 2007. European Shark Fisheries: a preliminary investigation into fisheries, 
conversion factors, trade products, markets and management measures. European Elasmobranch Association. 
8 IUCN, Shark specialist group: "Shark Specialist Group Finning Statement", 
http://www.flmnh.ufl.edu/fish/organizations/ssg/ssgfinstatementfinal2june.pdf 
• 
Ensure that bycatch for all elasmobranch species is reduced to as close to zero as possible and 
that when this bycatch limit is exceeded, the fishery is closed. If this bycatch is intentionally 
significant and the sharks caught are commercialized, then the commercial shark stocks must 
be managed with fishing limits and quotas; 
• 
Establish a ban on shark discards. However, endangered and critically endangered species and 
non-commercialized shark species that have a high survival rate, caught alive and with a chance 
to survive, must be released back to sea; 
• 
Ensure that sharks are landed with their fins attached to avoid illegal practices of finning;  
• 
Ensure that conservation and management measures for sharks in the Western and Central 
Pacific Ocean encompass vessels smaller than 24 metres. Until now, the shark conservation 
and management measures implemented in the WCPO have only applied to vessels smaller 
than 24 metres; however, a significant amount of sharks is also caught by smaller vessels. 9   
• 
Improve control measures at sea and in harbour, including enforced logbook completion and 
comprehensive observer programmes to gather fisheries data; and 
• 
Request scientific research and assessments for all commercial shark species in order to 
provide adequate management and conservation advice.  
 
We hope this information on the targeted shark fishing activities and by-catches in the WCPFC 
area will be of use and can contribute to the development of further management measures leading to 
sustainable shark fisheries in the Central and Western Pacific Ocean. 
 
 
                                                 
9 Gilman, E., Clarke, S., Brothers, N., Alfaro-Shigueto-J., Mandelman, J., Mangel, J., Petersen, S., Piovano, S., Thomson, N., 
Dalzell, P., Donoso, M., Goren, M., Werner, T. 2007. Shark Depredation and Unwanted Bycatch in Pelagic Longline Fisheries: 
Industry Practices and Attitudes, and Shark Avoidance Strategies. Western Pacific Regional Fishery Management Council, 
Honolulu, USA. 
 
 
