 
COMMISSION  
SIXTEENTH REGULAR SESSION  
Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea 
5 - 11 December 2019 
JOINT  CIVIL  SOCIETY  ORGANISATIONS  (CSO) STATEMENT  TO  THE  16TH  
REGULAR  SESSION  OF THE  COMMISSION  FOR  THE  CONSERVATION  AND 
MANAGEMENT  OF  HIGHLY  MIGRATORY  FISH STOCKS  IN  THE  WESTERN  AND  
CENTRAL  PACIFIC OCEAN (WCPFC). 
                                                                                                                                 WCPFC16-2019-OP16 
05 December  
1505 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by  
WWF 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
Background  
 
The decisions made by the 16th Regular Session of the Commission for the Conservation 
and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific 
Ocean (WCPFC16) will not only influence the future of tuna and other highly migratory 
fish stocks and associated species in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPO) but 
will directly shape the future of people and communities working in and derive their 
livelihood from the fishery.  
The outcomes of the WCPFC16 deliberations must continue progress toward achieving the 
Sustainable Development Goals in particular SDG 14 – “Conserve and sustainably use the 
oceans, seas and marine resources” and its specific targets including, but not limited to: 
marine pollution; regulating harvesting; ending overfishing, Illegal, Unreported and 
Unregulated fishing (IUU), and destructive fishing practices; implementing science-based 
management plans; prohibiting certain forms of fisheries subsidies which contribute to 
overcapacity and overfishing; eliminating subsidies that contribute to IUU fishing; and 
increasing the economic benefits to Small Island Developing States (SIDS) and Least 
Developed Countries (LDCs) from the sustainable use of marine resources. 
In addition, the WCPFC16 must also progress the goals of the Pacific Regional Roadmap 
for Sustainable Pacific Fisheries including improving overall sustainability for the four key 
tuna species, safeguarding food security, value, employment opportunities, and safety of 
those working in the fishery and associated industries. A resilient and sustainable tuna 
fishery also contributes to safeguarding and enhancing the resilience of the Pacific Islands 
region to the impacts of climate change.  
JOINT 
STATEMENT 
2019 
DECEMBER 
JOINT 
CIVIL 
SOCIETY 
ORGANISATIONS 
(CSO) 
STATEMENT TO THE 16TH REGULAR SESSION OF 
THE COMMISSION FOR THE CONSERVATION AND 
MANAGEMENT 
OF 
HIGHLY 
MIGRATORY 
FISH 
STOCKS IN THE WESTERN AND CENTRAL PACIFIC 
OCEAN (WCPFC). 
                         
2 
 
JOINT CSO STATEMENT TO WCPFC16 
WWF submits this joint position statement on behalf of the undersigned CSOs that 
participate in the WCPFC consultation process, or may seek to participate in future. The 
legitimacy and importance of public participation in multilateral environmental 
agreements including fisheries is broadly recognised as international best practice and 
mandated for in a range of international instruments and agreements.  In relation to 
fisheries, this participation has been codified in the United Nations Fish Stocks 
Agreement (UNFSA). 
Representatives of Pacific-based CSOs were consulted on upcoming issues at WCPFC16. 
CSOs representatives included the Pacific Islands Association of Non-Government 
Organisation (PIANGO), Pacific Dialogue Limited (PDL), Pacific Island Tuna Industry 
Association (PITIA), Pacific Network on Globalisation (PANG) and World Wide Fund for 
Nature (WWF).  
The safety and basic human rights of fishing crew, marine pollution, transparency, and 
accountability of the Commission were highlighted as concerns by the CSO 
representatives, without losing sight of the importance of the sustainability of the WCPO’s 
tuna resource. 
The sustainability and economic viability of this fishery is of particular importance for 
those Pacific Small Island Developing States (PSIDS) members of the Commission that 
depend on the fishery for their livelihoods and economic opportunities.  
 
ISSUES & RECOMMENDATIONS  
CSO representatives agreed that some of their concerns raised at previous sessions of the 
Commission have not been sufficiently addressed.  As such, the following issues have been 
identified as of primary importance to be considered by WCPFC16: 
1. We note with concern that the adoption of harvest strategy work plans for the key 
species has continuously been delayed which may impact PSIDS that have invested 
in eco-labelling certification. We support and reiterate calls from fisheries industry 
participants with eco-labelling certification, sustainable conscious actors and 
consumers along the tuna supply chain to support harvest strategy development 
and adoption. We believe this step should be taken while these stocks are in a 
 
 
Sample Paper 
Sample Paper 
Sample Paper 
 
3 
 
JOINT CSO STATEMENT TO WCPFC16 
generally healthy biological state. The lack of effective management in the WCPO, 
and in particular the high seas, is threatening the long term sustainability of key 
tuna stocks.  
Recommendation:  
Urgently establish Harvest Strategies for all tuna species since the 
agreed timeframe according to the Harvest Strategy workplan 
(CMM2014-06) has lapsed. In particular, establish target reference 
points (TRPs) for Yellowfin and Bigeye tunas that will accomplish 
objectives to ensure the long-term sustainability, productivity and 
social benefits of the fishery. 
 
2. Limited WCPFC Observer participation and the need for greater transparency in all 
related Commission meetings including all related sessions to ensure accountability 
and openness in the management of our tuna resource. We acknowledge the work 
that has been taken to develop guidelines for participation of Observers in closed 
meetings of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies which consider the 
compliance monitoring report but note the lack of agreement over its adoption. 
Recommendation:  
Improve 
transparency 
of 
the 
WCPFC 
proceedings 
to 
ensure 
consistency with Article 21 of the WCPF Convention. The Commission 
should consider the following: 
a. Allow WCPFC Observers access to all sessions of the WCPFC 
including matters relating to Compliance and urge members to 
adopt the draft guidelines allowing for the participation of 
Observers in closed meetings of the Commission and its 
subsidiary bodies which consider the compliance monitoring 
report; 
b. Review participation fees for WCPFC Observers. Fees should be 
set at a level to encourage participation of CSOs from WCPFC 
SIDS members. 
 
                         
4 
 
JOINT CSO STATEMENT TO WCPFC16 
3. The need for greater observer coverage in the longline fishery to ensure the 
accuracy and adequacy of data enhances the Commission’s ability to effectively 
manage the tuna fishery sustainably. Limited observer coverage limits the ability to 
monitor compliance with conservation and management measures. 
Recommendation:  
Increase the number of fisheries observers onboard longline fishing 
vessels operating within the Commission’s jurisdiction to ensure 
improved catch data, reporting and compliance with regulations. 
Furthermore, CCMs must continue to facilitate the uptake of Electronic 
Monitoring Systems (EMS), along with standards that are consistent 
and compatible in use and practice particularly on the high seas, to 
complement the work of fisheries observers as a means to ensure full 
observer coverage on all longline fishing vessels is achieved. 
 
4. Controlling high seas catch, effort, capacity and associated activities in particular 
at-sea transhipments. 
Recommendation:  
We recommend prohibiting at-sea transhipments particularly on the 
high seas given the challenges of effectively monitoring transhipments 
on the high seas and recommend that transhipments take place in port. 
CCMs must also take the necessary steps to implement CMM 2017/02 
Conservation and Management Measure on Minimum Standards for 
Port State Measures in order to strengthen efforts to combat IUU 
fishing. We encourage CCMs to conduct more port inspections, 
particularly on vessels suspected of being involved in IUU fishing 
activities. 
 
 
 
 
Sample Paper 
Sample Paper 
Sample Paper 
 
5 
 
JOINT CSO STATEMENT TO WCPFC16 
 
5. The use of FADs and the impacts to coastal communities and small-scale fisheries 
and fishers is not fully known. 
Recommendation: 
We recommend that impacts of FADs to coastal communities and small 
scale fisheries and fishers must be taken into consideration in 
deliberations on FAD management.  
 
6. We acknowledge the adoption of the Resolution 2018-01 on Labour Standards for 
Crew on Fishing Vessels however we note that the Resolution is non-binding. We 
also note that certain markets are moving towards ensuring that social 
accountability standards in fisheries supply chains are met. Eco-labelling 
certification entities are now requiring social accountability standards to 
complement environmental standards in response to market demands. The safe 
working conditions and well-being of fishing crew and of fisheries observers is 
paramount.  
Recommendation:  
Implement binding measures that ensures safe and decent working 
conditions of fishing crew on fishing vessels operating in the 
Convention Area in line with FFA’s Harmonised Minimum Terms and 
Conditions on Human Rights and Labour Conditions for Crew that 
will come into effect on January 1st, 2020; IMO’s Cape Town 
Agreement on Fishing Vessels Safety; and ILO’s Work in Fishing 
Convention, 2007 (C188). 
 
7. Although CMM 2017-03 Conservation and Management Measure for the 
protection of WCPFC Regional Observer Programme Observers has been adopted, 
the challenge lies in its implementation. The mandatory documentation and 
reporting of incidences concerning observer safety and well-being is non-existent 
which undermines the Commission’s ability to effectively address the issue.   
 
                         
6 
 
JOINT CSO STATEMENT TO WCPFC16 
Recommendation:  
Improve requirements and avenues for reporting of incidents involving 
crew and observer safety and well-being to ensure accountability, 
transparency and to inform future management of this issue. 
 
8. Impacts on the wider oceanic environment of marine pollution from fishing vessels 
in particular discarded and abandoned fishing gear, disposal of plastic waste and 
oil pollution into the ocean. The current measure in place does not effectively 
address compulsory compliance by CCMs. 
Recommendation:  
CCMs should take the necessary steps to implement CMM 2017/04 
Conservation and Management Measure on Marine Pollution in 
particular prohibiting the discharging of any plastics and we call for 
further action to prohibit the deliberate abandonment of fishing gear 
currently not covered under CMM 2017/04. 
 
Although mindful that trade matters are not the mandate of the Commission we 
call on World Trade Organization (WTO) Members of the WCPFC to ensure that 
any outcome on fisheries subsidies negotiations deliver on adequate and effective 
'special and differential treatment’ as per SDG 14.6. This is in recognition of the 
need for disproportionate burden upon those WTO members whose subsidised 
fleets have historically over-fished waters and as such must undertake the highest 
level of commitments. Disciplining subsidies for large-scale vessels fishing outside 
of the subsidising nation's jurisdiction will mean that those most responsible for 
overcapacity will be targeted first. 
The sovereignty of all coastal nations, especially small island developing states, as 
currently enshrined in UNCLOS must not be weakened by proposed WTO 
disciplines. Any outcome within the WTO must not undermine the processes, 
competencies, or jurisdiction of national authorities and RFMOs such as the 
WCPFC when it comes to making determinations regarding IUU fishing or 
assessing stock levels. 
 
 
Sample Paper 
Sample Paper 
Sample Paper 
 
7 
 
JOINT CSO STATEMENT TO WCPFC16 
The special requirements of developing countries as enshrined in legally and non-
legally binding international fisheries agreements, including UNFSA must be 
reflected in any outcome. Further the provision of adequate technical and financial 
assistance for the implementation of any commitments must be conditioned upon 
the level of disciplines undertaken by WTO members. Any agreed disciplines 
should not create disguised restrictions to trade for developing countries. 
 
Conclusion 
We wish to emphasize that the concern about the sustainability of the fishery and the 
safety and security of fishing crew and observers is shared by the undersigned in 
solidarity. We are hopeful that the outcomes of the WCPFC16 will take these 
recommendations into consideration. 
The following organisations hereby endorse this joint statement. 
 
 
 
       
 
 
                                                         
                                                                   
           
                
 
 
 
 

 
W
                         
8 
 
JOINT CSO STATEMENT TO WCPFC16 
Abbreviations 
 CCMs  
- 
Cooperating Commission Members 
CSO 
 
- 
Civil Society Organisation 
EEZ 
 
- 
Exclusive Economic Zone 
FAD 
 
- 
Fish Aggregation Device 
FFA 
 
- 
Forum Fisheries Agency 
ILO 
 
- 
International Labour Organisation 
IUU 
 
-  
Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing  
LDC’s  
- 
Least Developed Countries  
NGO   
- 
Non-Governmental Organisations  
PDL 
 
- 
Pacific Dialogue Limited 
PANG  
- 
Pacific Network on Globalisation 
PIANGO 
- 
Pacific Islands Association of Non-Government Organisation 
PITIA               - 
Pacific Island Tuna Industry Association 
PSIDS  
- 
Pacific Small Island Developing States 
SDG                -           Sustainable Development Goals 
TRP 
 
- 
Target Reference Point 
UNFSA            -          United Nations Fish Stock Agreement 
WCPFC 
- 
Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission 
WCPFC16 
- 
16th Regular Session of the Commission 
WCPO  
- 
Western and Central Pacific Ocean 
WTO  
- 
World Trade Organisation  
WWF              - 
World Wide Fund for Nature 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
JOINT CSO STATEMENT TO WCPFC16 
Disclaimer: This joint CSO Position Statement is produced with the assistance of the Pacific European 
Union Marine Partnership Programme (PEUMP) through the Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA). The contents 
are the sole responsibility of the undersigned Civil Society Organisations and can in no way be reflected to 
be the view of PEUMP or FFA. 
