 
 
COMMISSION 
 EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION  
Tumon, Guam, USA 
26-30 March 2012 
WWF Position Statement WCPFC_8 Final  
WCPFC8- 2011-OP/06  
24 March 2012 
 
WWF & TRAFFIC Statement to the WCPFC – 8 Regular Session, Guam, 26-30 March 2012  1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
WWF & TRAFFIC STATEMENT TO WCPFC – 8th Regular Session 
Guam, 26-30 March 2012 
 
Introduction and Summary 
The challenge of overfishing facing the globe is immediate and pressing. The WCPFC is no longer a 
fledgling RFMO and has matured. WWF & TRAFFIC call on members, participating territories and 
cooperating non-members of the WCPFC to take heed of the issues and recommendations raised at TCC-
7 and  other WCPFC Committees and priorities action on: 
 
I. 
Harvest strategy & Harvest control rules  
WWF & TRAFFIC call on the WCPFC to adopt harvest control rules that are well-defined, pre-agreed 
and contain mandatory actions for an agreed and determined course of management action in 
response to changes in indicators of stock status with respect to reference points. 
II. 
Reference points  
WWF & TRAFFIC strongly urges the WCPFC to formally adopt limit and target reference points. The  
adoption  of  explicitly  determined  limit  and  target  reference points  for  at  least  the  four  key  
tuna  species, namely skipjack (SKJ), albacore (ALB), Yellowfin (YFT), and bigeye (BET), is  an  absolute  
priority  for  the  sustainable management of these resources in the WCPO. 
III. 
Tuna species 
III.1. Bigeye Tuna 
WWF & TRAFFIC reiterates its recommendation from WCPFC-7 for the need to support fully the SC 
recommendation to the WCPF Commission for returning the WCPO BET stock back to levels  above 
BSMY and therefore implementing measures that successfully reduce levels of fishing mortality by a 
minimum of 32% from average levels for 2006-2009, or equivalent to a minimum 39% reduction of 
the 2004 level in fishing mortality, and a 28% reduction of the average 2001–2004 levels. 
III.2. Yellowfin Tuna 
WWF & TRAFFIC call for the precautionary approach to be observed, and supports the Scientific 
Committee’s recommendation to the Commission made previously for YFT in the WCPO to limit YFT 
fishing mortality to its 2001-2004 level. 
III.3. Pacific Bluefin Tuna (PBT) 
WWF & TRAFFIC Statement to the WCPFC – 8 Regular Session, Guam, 26-30 March 2012  2 
 
WWF & TRAFFIC call on WCPFC to remove all current exemptions from CMM-2010-04  and 
encourage all fishing nations to implement the substantial management measures for juvenile 
(age0-3) PBT to keep fishing mortality of PBT to no more than its 2002-2004 fishing mortality level. 
III.4. South Pacific Albacore 
WWF and TRAFFIC support the effort of Island Small Developing States (Pacific SIDS) to strengthen 
the management strategy for the albacore longline fishery and to address the related species 
interaction issues. Measures aimed at introducing effective capacity limits and effort management 
must be urgently addressed by WCPFC and the region’s domestic fisheries managers.  
 
IV. 
Regional Observer Program (ROP)  
WWF & TRAFFIC consider the presence of observers on every fishing and support vessel 
fundamental to fishing best practice and call for a comprehensive and strong Regional Observer 
Program with 100% coverage of all fishing vessels (including both catching and support vessels). 
WWF & TRAFFIC call upon the WCPFC to meet the 100% ROP target by 2013. 
 
V. 
Catch Documentation Scheme 
WWF & TRAFFIC recommend the adoption of a comprehensive CDS measure for at least the five key 
tuna species1 with a date of implementation to be agreed and implemented. 
 
VI. 
Mitigation of Bycatch Impacts 
WWF and TRAFFIC remind WCPFC members, participating territories and cooperating non-members 
of their responsibility to address the bycatch of species and act immediately. A number of 
environmental NGOs (including WWF and TRAFFIC) have developed a Compendium (2011) of best 
practice Conservation and Management Measures (CMMs) for the bycatch of four taxonomic 
groups2. This Compendium and the individual draft binding measures provides WCPFC with advice 
on the best practice and precautionary measures that must be implemented on an interim basis 
pending the determination of optimal mitigation packages based on research and sound science. 
These actions can be reviewed and revised to reflect that advice when it becomes available. 
 
WWF and TRAFFIC also request that WCPFC implement the recommendations of the joint technical 
bycatch working group from Kobe III (the joint tuna RFMO process)3.
                                                           
1 Bigeye Tuna, Yellowfin Tuna, Albacore Tuna, Skipjack Tuna, Pacific Bluefin Tuna. 
2 Seabirds, Sharks, Sea turtles and Marine mammals. 
3 WCPFC8-2011/15 
WWF & TRAFFIC Statement to the WCPFC – 8 Regular Session, Guam, 26-30 March 2012  3 
 
 
Main text 
 
WWF & TRAFFIC remind members, participating territories and cooperating non-members  of our 
positions tabled at the last meeting of the WCPFC in Honolulu in December 2010 (WCPFC-7), related 
subsequent meetings of the WCPFC and the recommendations of the joint tuna RFMO process (Kobe 
Process) prioritizing: 
 
1. Harvest strategy & Harvest control rules  
 
 The precautionary approach, Convention, article 5(c), to fisheries management has been considered a 
basic element of sustainability since its introduction in the 1995 UN Fish Stocks Agreement. It has been 
widely adopted in domestic and international law asan underpinning requirement for good 
management and included in the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries.. It also appears 
prominently in the FAO Guidelines for Eco-labelling, and is a critical element for consideration in 
ecolabelling certification schemes such as the Marine Stewardship Council. 
 
The basic tenet is simple: do not take actions that could have an unacceptably high risk of compromising 
the health of the resource or its environment in the long term. The implementation of a precautionary 
approach is, in most cases, made operational through pre-agreed management actions (also called 
‘harvest control rules’) that are launched as soon as stock status indicators reach certain critical values 
(i.e. ‘reference points’). 
 
There are no explicit harvest control rules in the WCPFC.  Monitoring of the stocks is based on catch and 
effort data, length-frequency and tagging data.  The current rudimentary harvest strategy employed in 
the WCPFC does not contain any harvest control rules and  as such does not reflect best practice. The 
primary management action involves limiting fishing effort via an array of input controls such as the 
PNA’s Vessel Day Scheme (VDS), closure of high seas pockets, FAD closures, and implementation of 
capacity limits (driven by concerns for BET and YFT).   
  
The  Convention  for  the  WCPFC  includes  default  target  and  limit  reference  points  and  the 
management  objective  for  all  target  stocks  is  to  maintain  stocks  at  or  above  MSY-based 
reference points. The absence of harvest control rules that provide for immediate and effective action to 
reduce exploitation rates, when and as required, is a serious concern.  This is potentially an increasingly 
scrutinized flaw in the management of these fisheries if an international market perspective is taken. 
  
While  the  WCPFC  could  argue  that  it  is  capable  of  implementing  management  action  in response 
to scientific advice on stock status (for example BET and YFT), the effectiveness of this action is 
questionable and this underlines the importance of well defined harvest control rules to ensure timely 
and adequate management.   
  
WWF & TRAFFIC Statement to the WCPFC – 8 Regular Session, Guam, 26-30 March 2012  4 
 
WWF & TRAFFIC call on the WCPFC to adopt harvest control rules that are well-defined, pre-agreed 
and contain mandatory actions for an agreed and determined course of management action in 
response to changes in indicators of stock status with respect to reference points. 
 
2. Reference points  
The WCPFC has not adopted formal reference points for any tuna or tuna related species under its 
management in accordance with Article 6 (WCPFC 2004). 
  
WWF & TRAFFIC noted that in 2009 a special workshop on reference points was held by the WCPFC 
Scientific Committee’s Methods Specialist Working Group. WWF & TRAFFIC understands that it was 
expected that the Scientific Committee would make recommendations on appropriate provisional limit 
reference points  for  the  key  target  species  to  the  WCPFC  in  2010.  The Commission’s decisions on 
reference  points  will  also  take  into  account  the  outcomes  of  the  Workshop  on  Management 
Objectives held in 2010.  WWF & TRAFFIC note, however, that reference points have been under 
consideration in the WCPFC since 2006. 
 
There can  be  no certainty  that this  will not  be  delayed  again  or the Commission  will  formally  adopt 
them. 
 
WWF & TRAFFIC strongly urges the WCPFC to formally adopt limit and target reference points. The  
adoption  of  explicitly  determined  limit  and  target  reference points  for  at  least  the  four  key  
tuna  species, namely skipjack, albacore, yellowfin, and bigeye, is  an  absolute  priority  for  the  
sustainable management of these resources in the WCPO. 
 
3. Proposed CMM 2011/01 for Bigeye, Yellowfin and Skipjack tuna in the WCPFC Convention Area 
WWF & TRAFFIC sees a need for the improved performance of WCPFC if it is to ensure that tuna stocks it 
is responsible for are managed sustainably.. The most recent assessment of yellowfin tuna (YFT) by the 
SPC concludeses the stock is not in an overfished state. This is encouraging news, however it comes with 
the responsibility of ensuring that YFT fishing mortality is limited to its 2001-2004 level.  The status of 
bigeye tuna (BET) on the other hand raises significant concern. 
 
3.1. Bigeye Tuna 
The conclusion from the SC-7 Report based on the 2011 assessment of BET in the WCPO indicates that 
“current levels of catch are unlikely to be sustainable in the long term even at the recent (high) levels of 
recruitment estimated for the last two decades (SC-7 Summary Report, Para 141f).  At the least it is 
approaching an overfished state but “if recent recruitment is assumed to represent the true productivity 
of the bigeye stock (Run21), then the higher levels of BMSY and SBMSY would mean that BET is already in 
an overfished state.” (SC-7 Summary Report, Para. 141h).  
 
The SC-7 in its management advice has recommended for BET: 
o “A minimum of 32% reduction in fishing mortality from average levels for 2006-2009 to return the 
fishing mortality rate to FMSY. This recommended level  of  reduction  is equivalent to a minimum 
WWF & TRAFFIC Statement to the WCPFC – 8 Regular Session, Guam, 26-30 March 2012  5 
 
39% reduction of the 2004 level in fishing mortality, and a 28% reduction of the average 2001–2004 
levels.” 
o The Commission should consider the results of updated projections at WCPFC-8, and adopt 
additional measures to secure additional reductions in fishing mortality above those expected from 
the current CMM, to ensure that fishing mortality is reduced to at least the FMSY level, and remove 
the risk of the stock being overfished.” 
o “Measures that reduce fishing mortality across a range of fish sizes (e.g. fishing gears) are likely to 
produce the best results.” 
o The use of a spatial management approach. 
o The timely provision of all data necessary for stock assessment purposes. 
o The Commission should consider the results of updated projections at WCPFC-8. 
 
WWF & TRAFFIC reiterate our recommendation from WCPFC-7 for the need to support fully the SC 
recommendation to the WCPF Commission for returning the WCPO BET stock back to levels  above 
BSMY and therefore implementing measures that successfully reduce levels of fishing mortality by a 
minimum of 32% from average levels for 2006-2009, or equivalent to a minimum 39% reduction of the 
2004 level in fishing mortality, and a 28% reduction of the average 2001–2004 levels. 
 
3.2. Yellowfin Tuna 
The conclusion from the SC-7 Report based on the 2011 assessment of YFT in the WCPO indicates that 
overfishing is not occurring and that the stock is not in an overfished state. 
 
The SC-7 in its management advice has recommended for YFT: 
o Improved data collection that will better inform the robustness of the YFT fishery in the WCPO, in 
particular catch data particularly from the domestic fisheries of Indonesia and the Philippines, and 
the purse-seine catch (SC-7, Paragraph 184); and 
o That due to differences in fishing mortality and exploitation rates between regions (highest in region 
3, i.e. the western equatorial region accounting for approximately 81% of the total YFT catch), there 
should be no increase in fishing mortality in the western equatorial region (SC-7, Paragraphs 198-
200). 
 
WWF & TRAFFIC call for the precautionary approach to be observed, and supports the Scientific 
Committee’s recommendation to the Commission made previously for YFT in the WCPO to limit YFT 
fishing mortality to its 2001-2004 level. 
 
3.3. Pacific Bluefin Tuna 
 
Recalling the CPC reports on CMM-2010-04 implementation at the seventh meeting of the WCPFC’s 
Northern Committee (NC-7),, there is considerable harvesting of Pacific Bluefin Tuna without 
implementation of the appropriate management measures that meet the required CMM conditions due 
to the current exemptions contained in the PBT CMM.     
 
WWF & TRAFFIC Statement to the WCPFC – 8 Regular Session, Guam, 26-30 March 2012  6 
 
WWF & TRAFFIC call on WCPFC to remove all current exemptions from CMM-2010-04 by 2012, and all 
fishing nations to implement the substantial management measures for juvenile (age0-3) PBT to keep 
fishing mortality of PBT to no more than its 2002-2004 fishing mortality level. 
 
3.4. South Pacific Albacore 
 
WWF and TRAFFIC recognise the legitimate aspirations of SIDS to increase the value from tuna fisheries 
in their exclusive economic zones. There is however, considerable concern about the rapid growth in the 
longline fleet in the Western and Central Pacific. Of the total South Pacific Albacore (SPA) catch of 
75,000 tonnes (2010), Chinese and Chinese Taipei catch has increased from 24,000 (2000-2004) to 
53,000 tonnes.  
 
This growth in effort is leading to localised depletion of the adult stock and the increased effort south of 
20⁰S, on the juvenile migrating stock,  is contributing to a reduction in biomass. This is occurring as the 
stock rapidly approaches MSY levels. The effectiveness of the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries 
Commission (WCPFC) Conservation and Management Measure (CMM) 2005-02, as amended in 2010, to 
protect the southern Albacore stock, is now questionable, albeit that the scientists still maintain that the 
stock remains within biological limits.  
 
While recognising the legitimate aspirations of SIDS, within a robust and responsible sustainability 
framework to develop domestic fisheries – as required under CMM 2005-02/2010-05 -  anecdotal 
industry evidence indicates that there is a serious problem with over-licencing in a number of WCPO 
SIDS.  
 
WWF and TRAFFIC recognise the efforts that have been made to strengthen the management strategy 
for the albacore longline fishery . But there is an urgent need to introduce effective capacity limits and 
effort management for SPA. 
 
4. Regional Observer Program (ROP)  
WWF & TRAFFIC noted  in our WCPFC-7 joint statement that there was no current impediment to 100% 
observer coverage on support vessels, such as that  currently  in  place  on  purse  seine  vessels,  while  
100%  observer  coverage  for  longliners should be phased in. The  following timetable should be 
pursued as a 3-year phase-in of 100% Regional Observer Programme (ROP) coverage for all fishing 
vessels:  
  
o 2011 All support vessels (resupply, refueling, reefers) for all high seas fishing have 100% ROP 
coverage;  
o 2011  20%  of  all  longliners  (including  at  least  one  from  each  flag  state)  have  an  ROP observer 
on board;  
o 2012  50% of all longliners  (including  more than half of all  vessels from each flag  state) have an 
ROP observer on board; and 
o 2013 100% of all longliners have an ROP observer on board. 
WWF & TRAFFIC Statement to the WCPFC – 8 Regular Session, Guam, 26-30 March 2012  7 
 
 
It is disappointing that very little progress on the above time table for implementation has been 
progressed or achieved. Observer coverage is a priority and greater support should be given to the 
relevant authority to see that the capacity of the ROP is strengthened. Fisheries are a priority revenue 
earner for many countries in the Pacific and as such must be given the recognition they deserve in terms 
of strengthening conservation and management capacity. Furthermore, along with compliance issues, 
the increasing scrutiny by international markets of supply can be much better addressed if there is 
transparent information. Without a doubt, observers are a key link in this information chain. 
 
WWF & TRAFFIC consider the presence of observers on every fishing and support vessel as 
fundamental to fishing best practices and call for a comprehensive and strong Regional Observer 
Program with 100% coverage of all fishing vessels (including both catching and support vessels). WWF 
& TRAFFIC call upon the WCPFC to meet the 100% ROP target by 2013.  
 
5. Catch Documentation Scheme  
WWF & TRAFFIC consider the failure to implement a catch documentation scheme (CDS) as a significant 
problem. The WCPFC must take urgent action to address overfishing and to support and enforce that 
action by introducing a CDS.  WWF & TRAFFIC recognize that the introduction of a CDS will pose some 
challenges to the WCPFC given the nature of tuna fisheries. However, WCPFC needs to ensure that all 
fish stocks managed by this RFMO are subject to the CDS as a proactive precautionary measure. 
 
WWF & TRAFFIC recommends the adoption of a CDS measure for at least the five key tuna species4 with 
a date of implementation to be agreed and: 
 
A. to the implementation of  a  CDS  that  requires  documentation  to  accompany  all  catch  
harvested,  landed, transshipped, traded  domestically,  exported,  processed,  imported  and  
re-exported  and  which relies on electronic documentation. The CDS should not exclude any 
catches, landings or trade as is common in schemes which are trade based rather than catch 
document schemes. One only has  to  look to  the  lessons  learnt  by  the  Commission  for  the  
Conservation  of Southern  Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT) which has switched from a trade based scheme 
to a CDS due to the trade scheme allowing for substantial over catches by one of its members as 
a result of the trade scheme not being inclusive of all catches, landings or trade; 
B. that complementary measures are in place to maximize the effectiveness of the CDS by:      
C. ensuring that transshipment at sea does not compromise the effectiveness of the CDS; 
D. adopting  Port  State  measures  (consistent  with  the global Port State Measures Aagreement)  
to  take  effect  at  the same time as the tuna CDS; and 
E. adopting measures that provide for trade-restrictions to be used against flag States with vessels 
on the IUU list. 
                                                           
4 Bigeye Tuna, Yellowfin Tuna, Albacore Tuna, Skipjack Tuna, Pacific Bluefin Tuna. 
WWF & TRAFFIC Statement to the WCPFC – 8 Regular Session, Guam, 26-30 March 2012  8 
 
F. acknowledging  the  need  to  implement  CDS  for  other  species  of  tunas,  billfish  and  sharks 
managed by the Commission; 
G. a commitment to continuous improvement of the CDS by investigating the benefits and 
feasibility of verification systems such as tagging and the use of biotechnology; 
H. the establishment a capacity development fund to act as a cost-sharing mechanism to enable for 
cross subsidising across  wealthy and less-wealthy members to ensure effective implementation 
and administration of the CDS; and  
I. 
maximizing retailer and public access to CDS data through modern online tools. 
 
6. Mitigation of Bycatch Impacts 
 
WWF and TRAFFIC believe that WCPFC must: 
o take immediate management action to avoid bycatch interactions and to mitigate the 
impact of those interactions; 
o task the relevant scientific/ecosystem body to improve bycatch related information and 
strengthen the long-term management about bycatch levels and mitigation options; 
o review and revise management actions on bycatch as information increases; and take action to 
strengthen their capacity to manage and monitor compliance with conservation and 
management measures. 
 
A number of environmental NGOs (including WWF and TRAFFIC) have developed a Compendium (2011) 
best practice of Conservation and Management Measures (CMMs) for the bycatch species taxonomic 
groups. Four CMMs have been prepared, on the basis of the best available scientific advice and taking 
into account current practice within tuna RFMOs. The CMMs cover the following four taxonomic groups: 
o Seabirds 
o Sharks 
o Sea turtles 
o Marine mammals 
 
6. Conclusion 
The responsibility of the WCPFC is clearly laid out as is the expectation for the sustainable management 
of fisheries resources within its mandate. The lack of or need for strengthening certain measures are 
undermining sustainability in the WCPO and need to be addressed urgently.  WWF & TRAFFIC call on the 
Commission to act quickly on the issues raised above for a sustainable future.  
 
References: 
Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission Convention (2004) 
 
WCPFC Scientific Committee (2011) Summary Report of the Seventh Regular Session of the Scientific 
Committee (Adopted version) – rev.3 (21 September 2011), WCPFC, Pohnpei, FSM, 9-17 August 2011 
 
WWF & TRAFFIC Statement to the WCPFC – 8 Regular Session, Guam, 26-30 March 2012  9 
 
WWF & TRAFFIC-TRAFFIC (2010) WWF & TRAFFIC-TRAFFIC Position Statement to WCPFC 7, WCPFC-
2010-OP-04, Honolulu, Hawaii, 6-10 December 2010 
 
WWF (2011) WWF Position Statement to TCC 7, WCPFC-TCC7-2011-OB-05, Pohnpei, FSM, 28 
September-04th October 2011 
 
WCPFC Northern Committee (2011) Summary Report of the Seventh Regular Session of the Northern 
Committee (Adopted version), WCPFC, Sapporo, Japan, 6-9 September 2011   
 
A Compendium of Conservation and Management Measures to address the impacts of species bycatch 
in tuna RFMOs (2011) http://www.hsi.org/assets/pdfs/joint_fisheries_bycatch_2011.pdf 
 
 
