Seabird bycatch mitigation measures in pelagic fisheries 
BirdLife International 
 
On 14 October 2006 a workshop was held to prioritise research needed to address seabird bycatch 
mitigation in pelagic longline fisheries. In addition, the workshop participants shared knowledge on 
known and potential seabird bycatch mitigation measures in pelagic fisheries, examining the effectiveness 
of measures on both surface-foraging and diving seabirds, and their practicality and safety when used on 
fishing vessels. The workshop was organised by Washington Sea Grant, University of Washington, and 
was staged in Hobart to take advantage of experts present for the annual meeting of the ad hoc Working 
Group on Incidental Mortality Arising from Fishing (IMAF) of the Commission for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR). 
 
Recognising the intention of the WCPFC to discuss seabird bycatch mitigation measures in December 
2006, and the seabird mitigation recommendation drafted by the 2006 meeting of the WCPFC Scientific 
Committee, this document summarises knowledge shared at the meeting. The attached table discusses 
strengths and weaknesses of each mitigation measure, the need for combinations of measures, and current 
data gaps (Table 1). A full copy of the workshop report is available at www.wsg.washington.edu.  
 
Conclusions 
 
• 
The seabird recommendation from the WCPFC Scientific Committee in August 2006 would be a 
highly constructive step to reduce seabird bycatch in the WCPFC area.  
 
• 
With the exception of bait casters, the mitigation measures listed are a good depiction of measures 
believed to reduce seabird bycatch in pelagic fisheries. However, caveats are associated with most 
measures. This reiterates the point made at the WCPFC Ecosystem & Bycatch meeting on the need to 
use combinations of measures. All fisheries in which seabird bycatch mitigation has been successful 
have found that combinations of measures are essential. As stated at the WCPFC Ecosystem & 
Bycatch meeting, the strength of the Column A and Column B approach is that it requires such 
combinations while also providing flexibility to select the combination most suited to their vessel. 
 
• 
Streamer lines, night setting and weighted branch lines can be highly effective mitigation measures 
when used properly and in combination. Side-setting has been found effective in Hawaiian fisheries 
when combined with line weighting and a setting curtain. However, research is urgently needed to test 
the effectiveness of side-setting in the Southern Ocean, where deeper-diving seabird species are 
common. Further testing is also recommended on the effectiveness of blue-dyed squid in the Southern 
Ocean, on the effectiveness of lineshooters, and on best practises for offal management. A plan for 
research developed across pelagic fishery RFMOs would provide the necessary tools to reduce seabird 
mortality in pelagic fisheries worldwide. 
  
• 
As noted at the 2006 WCPFC Scientific Committee meeting, the recommendations on seabird 
mitigation measures should be considered as interim. Measures will need to be re-evaluated as more 
information becomes available through research.  
 
Recommendation to the Third Meeting of the WCPFC 
� A seabird Conservation Measure based on the recommendation from the WCPFC Scientific 
Committee would be a highly constructive step to reduce seabird bycatch in the WCPFC area. The 
strength of the recommendation lies in its requirement for the use of two mitigation measures, 
providing the necessary use of a combination of measures, while also providing flexibility for 
fishermen to select the combination most suited to their vessel.
Table 1. Review of seabird bycatch mitigation measures listed in the seabird recommendation from the WCPFC Scientific Committee 
Column A 
Scientific evidence for 
effectiveness in pelagic 
fisheries 
Caveats /Notes 
Need for combination Research needs 
Minimum standards 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Night setting 
Duckworth 1995; Brothers 
et al. 1999; Gales et al 
1998; Klaer & Polacheck 
1998; Brothers et al. 1999; 
McNamara et al. 1999; 
Gilman et al. 2005; Baker & 
Wise 2005. 
Less effective during full moon, 
under intensive deck lighting or 
in high latitude fisheries in 
summer. Less effective on 
nocturnal foragers e.g. White-
chinned Petrels (Brothers et al. 
1999; Cherel et al. 1996). 
Recommend 
combination with tori 
lines and/or weighted 
branch lines 
Data on current time of sets 
by WCPFC fisheries. Effect 
of night sets on target catch 
for different fisheries. 
Night defined as nautical 
dark to nautical dawn 
Side setting 
Brothers & Gilman 2006; 
Yokota & Kiyota 2006. 
Only effective if hooks are 
sufficiently below the surface by 
the time they reach the stern of 
the vessel. In Hawaii, side-setting 
trials were conducted with bird 
curtain and 45-60g weighted 
swivels placed within 0.5m of 
hooks. Japanese research 
concludes must be used with 
other measures (Yokota & 
Kiyota 2006).  
Must be combined with 
other measures. 
Successful Hawaii trials 
use bird curtain plus 
weighted branch lines. 
In Southern 
Hemisphere, strongly 
recommend use wth tori 
lines until side-setting is 
tested in the region. 
Currently untested in the 
Southern Ocean against 
seabird assemblages with 
diving seabirds and 
albatrosses - urgent need for 
research. In Japan, NRIFSF 
will continue testing in 2007.
In Hawaii, side setting is 
used in conjunction with a 
bird curtain and 45 weighted 
swivel within 1m of the 
baited hook. 
Single tori line 
Imber 1994; Uozomi & 
Takeuchi 1998; Brothers et 
al. 1999; Klaer & Polacheck 
1998; McNamara et al. 
1999; Boggs 2001; 
CCAMLR 2002;  Minami & 
Kiyota 2004. Melvin 2003. 
Effective only when streamers 
are positioned over sinking baits. 
In pelagic fisheries, baited hooks 
are unlikely to sink beyond the 
diving depths of diving seabirds 
within the 150m zone of the tori 
line, unless combined with other 
measures such as line weighting 
or underwater setting. 
Entanglement with fishing gear 
can lead to poor compliance by 
fishers and design issues need to 
be addressed. In crosswinds, tori 
line must be deployed from the 
windward side to be effective. 
Effectiveness increased 
when combined with 
other measures e.g. 
weighted branch lines 
and/or night setting 
Optimal design for pelagic 
fisheries still under 
development: refine to 
minimise tangling, optimise 
aerial extent and positioning, 
and ease hauling/retrieval. 
Current research by Ed 
Melvin (Washington Sea 
Grant), also program for 
small vessels by Global 
Guardian Trust in Japan. 
Controlled studies 
demonstrating their 
effectiveness in pelagic 
fisheries remain very limited. 
Current minimum standards 
for pelagic fisheries are 
based on CCAMLR 
Conservation Measure 25-02
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Table 1 continued. 
Column B 
Scientific evidence for 
effectiveness in pelagic 
fisheries 
Caveats /Notes 
Need for combination Research needs 
Minimum standards 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Paired tori line Two streamer lines best in 
crosswinds to maximise 
protection of baited hooks 
(Melvin et al. 2004). 
Potentially increased likelihood 
of entanglement - see above. 
Development of a towed device 
that keeps gear from crossing 
surface gear essential to improve 
adoption and compliance. 
Effectiveness will be 
increased when 
combined with other 
measures. Recommend 
use with weighted 
branch lines and/or 
night setting 
Development and trialling of 
paired streamer line systems 
for pelagic fisheries. 
  
Weighted 
branch lines 
Brothers 1991; Boggs 2001; 
Sakai et al. 2001; Brothers 
et al. 2001; Anderson & 
McArdle 2002; Gilman et 
al. 2003a; Robertson 2003; 
Lokkeborg & Robertson 
2002,  Hu et al. 2005. 
Supplementary measure. Weights 
will shorten but not eliminate the 
zone behind the vessel in which 
birds can be caught. Even in 
demersal fisheries where weights 
are much heavier, weights must 
be combined with other 
mitigation measures (e.g. 
CCAMLR Conservation Measure 
25-02).  
Must be combined with 
other measures e.g. tori 
lines and/or night setting 
Weight and position of 
weight both affect sink rate. 
Further research on 
weighting regimes needed. 
Safety issues and effect on 
target catch must be 
considered. Research on use 
of integrated-weight branch 
lines in pelagic fisheries also 
needs further exploration. 
Global minimum standards 
not yet established. 
Requirements vary by 
fishery and vessel. Hawaii 
minimum requirements are 
45g less than 1 m from 
hook. Australia requires 60 
or 90g located 3.5 or 4 m 
from the hook, respectively.
Blue dyed bait 
Boggs 2001; Brothers 1991; 
Gilman et al. 2003a; 
Minami & Kiyota 2001; 
Minami & Kiyota 2004; 
Lydon & Starr 2005. 
Double and Cocking, in 
press. 
New data suggests only effective 
with squid bait (Double & 
Cocking). Onboard dyeing 
requires labour and is difficult 
under stormy conditions. Results 
inconsistent across studies. 
Must be combined with 
tori lines or night setting 
Need for tests in Southern 
Ocean.  
Mix to standardized colour 
placard or specify (e.g. use 
'Brilliant Blue' food dye 
(Colour Index 42090, also 
known as Food Additive 
number E133) mixed at 
0.5% for a minimum of 20 
minutes) 
Line shooter 
Reduced bycatch of 
Northern Fulmar in trials of 
mitigation measures in 
North Sea, Lokkeborg & 
Robertson 2002; Lokkeborg 
2003. Increased seabird 
bycatch in Alaska (Melvin 
et al. 2001). 
Supplementary measure. No 
published data for pelagic 
fisheries. May enhance hook sink 
rates in some situations but will 
not eliminate the zone behind the 
vessel in which birds can be 
caught. More data needed. Found 
ineffective in trials in North 
Pacific demersal longline fishery 
(Melvin et al. 2001).  
Must be combined with 
other measures such as 
night setting and/or tori 
lines or weighted branch 
lines 
Data needed for pelagic 
fisheries. 
Not established 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Table 1 continued. 
Column B 
Scientific evidence for 
effectiveness in pelagic 
fisheries 
Caveats /Notes 
Need for combination Research needs 
Minimum standards 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Bait caster 
Duckworth 1995; Klaer & 
Polacheck 1998. 
Not a mitigation measure unless 
casting machines are available 
with the capability to control the 
distance at which baits are cast. 
This is necessary to allow 
accurate delivery of baits under a 
tori line. Needs more 
development. Few commercially-
available machines have this 
capability.  
Not recommended as a 
mitigation measure. 
  
  
Underwater 
setting chute 
Brothers 1991; Boggs 2001; 
Gilman et al. 2003a; Gilman 
et al. 2003b; Sakai et al. 
2004; Lawrence et al. 2006. 
For pelagic fisheries, existing 
equipment not yet sturdy enough 
for large vessels in rough seas. 
Problems with malfunctions and 
performance inconsistent (e.g. 
Gilman et al. 2003a and 
Australian trials cited in Baker & 
Wise 2005) 
Not recommended for 
general application 
Design problems to 
overcome 
Not yet established 
Management of 
offal discharge 
McNamara et al. 1999; 
Cherel et al. 1996. 
Supplementary measure. May 
reduce the number of birds 
attracted to the vessel, and 
strategic discharge can be used to 
distract birds. Effectiveness in 
pelagic fisheries is not well 
established. There may be 
storage space constraints on 
smaller vessels.  
Must be combined with 
other measures 
Further information needed 
on effects in pelagic fisheries 
(long and short term) 
Not yet established for 
pelagic fisheries. In 
CCAMLR demersal 
fisheries, discharge of offal 
is prohibited during line 
setting. During line hauling, 
storage of waste is 
encouraged, and if 
discharged must be 
discharged on the opposite 
side of the vessel to the 
hauling bay.  
Thawing bait 
Brothers 1991; Duckworth 
1995; Klaer & Polacheck; 
Brothers et al 1999. 
Supplementary measure. Must be 
combined with other measures. If 
lines are set early morning, full 
thawing of all bait may create 
practical difficulties. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
References 
Anderson, S. and McArdle, B., 2002. Sink rate of baited hooks during deployment of a pelagic longline from a New Zealand fishing vessel. New 
Zealand Journal of Marine and Freshwater Research 36, 185–195. 
Baker, G. B., and Wise, B. S. 2005. The impact of pelagic longline fishing on the flesh-footed shearwater Puffinus carneipes in Eastern Australia. 
Biological Conservation 126:306 - 316. 
Boggs, C.H., 2001. Deterring albatrosses from contacting baits during swordfish longline sets. In: Melvin, E., Parrish, J.K. (Eds), Seabird 
Bycatch: Trends, Roadblocks and Solutions. University of Alaska Sea Grant, Fairbanks, Alaska, pp. 79–94. 
Brothers, N. and Gilman, E. 2006. Technical assistance for Hawaii-based pelagic longline vessels to modify deck design and fishing practices to 
side set. Prepared for the National marine Fisheries Service Pacific Islands Regional Office. Blue Ocean Institute, September 2006. 
Brothers, N. P. 1991. Approaches to reducing albatross mortality and associated bait loss in the Japanese long-line fishery. Biological 
Conservation. 55, 255-268. 
Brothers, N., Gales, R. and Reid, T. 1999. The influence of environmental variables and mitigation measures on seabird catch rates in the Japanese 
tuna longline fishery within the Australian Fishing Zone 1991-1995. Biological Conservation 88:85-101. 
Brothers, N., Gales, R., Reid, T., 2001. The effect of line weighting on the sink rate of pelagic tuna longline hooks, and it's potential for 
minimising seabird mortalities. CCSBT-ERS/0111/53. 
CCAMLR, 2002. Report of the working group on fish stock assessment. Report of the twenty-first meeting of the Scientific Committee of the 
Commission for the Conservation of Marine Living Resources. Commission for the Conservation of Marine Living Resources, Hobart. 
Cherel, Y., Weimerskirch, H. , Duhamel., G 1996. Interactions between longline vessels and seabirds in Kerguelen Waters and a method to reduce 
seabird mortality. Biological Conservation 75:63-70. 
Double, M. and Cocking, L. In press. 
Duckworth, K., 1995. Analysis of factors which influence seabird bycatch in the Japanese southern bluefin tuna longline fishery in New Zealand 
waters, 1989–1993. New Zealand Fisheries Assessment Research Document 95/26. 
Gales, R., Brothers, N. and Reid, T. 1998. Seabird mortality in the Japanese tuna longline fishery around Australia, 1988-1995. Biological 
Conservation. 86,37 56. 
Gilman, E., Brothers, N., Kobayashi, D. R., Martin, S., Cook, J., Ray, J., Ching, G., Woods, B. 2003a. Performance assessment of underwater 
setting chutes, side setting, and blue-dyed bait to minimize seabird mortality in Hawaii longline tuna and swordfish fisheries. Final report. 
Western Pacific Regional Fishery Management Council. Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. 42pp. 
Gilman, E., C. Boggs, and N. Brothers. 2003b. Performance assessment of an underwater setting chute to mitigate seabird bycatch in the Hawaii 
pelagic longline tuna fishery. Ocean and Coastal Management 46(11-12): 985-1010. 
Gilman, E., N. Brothers, D. Kobayashi. 2005. Principles and approaches to abate seabird bycatch in longline fisheries. Fish and Fisheries 6: 35-49. 
Hu, F., Shiga, M., Yokota, K., Shiode, D., Tokai, T., Sakai, H., Arimoto, T. 2005. Effects of specifications of branch line on sinking 
characteristics of hooks in Japanese tuna longline. Nippon Suisan Gakkaishi 71 (1): 33-38.  
Imber, M.J., 1994. Report on a tuna long-lining fishing voyage aboard Southern Venture to observe seabird by-catch problems. Science & 
Research Series 65. Department of Conservation, Wellington, New Zealand. 
Klaer, N. and T. Polacheck. 1998. The influence of environmental factors and mitigation measures on by-catch rates of seabirds by Japanese 
longline fishing vessels in the Australian region. Emu 98:305-16. 
Lawrence, E., Wise, B., Bromhead, D., Hindmarsh, S., Barry, S., Bensley, N. and Findlay, J. 2006. Analyses of AFMA seabird mitigation trials – 
2001 to 2004. Bureau of Rural Sciences. Canberra. 
Lokkeborg, S. and Robertson, G., 2002. Seabird and longline interactions: effects of a bird-scaring streamer line and line shooter on the incidental 
capture of northern fulmars Fulmarus glacialis. Biological Conservation 106, 359–364. 
Lokkeborg, S., 2003. Review and evaluation of three mitigation measures - bird-scaring line, underwater setting and line shooter - to reduce 
seabird bycatch in the north Atlantic longline fishery. Fisheries Research 60, 11–16. 
Lydon, G. and Starr, P., 2005. Effect of blue dyed bait on incidental seabird mortalities and fish catch rates on a commercial longliner fishing off 
East Cape, New Zealand. Unpublished Conservation Services Programme Report, Department of Conservation, New Zealand. 12 p. 
McNamara B, Torre L, Kaaialii G. Hawaii longline seabird mortality mitigation project. Honolulu, HI, USA: Western Pacific Regional Fishery 
Management Council, 1999. 
Melvin, E. F., J. K. Parrish, K. S. Dietrich, and O. S. Hamel. 2001. Solutions to seabird bycatch in Alaska's demersal longline fisheries. Project 
A/FP-7, WSG-AS 01-01, Washington Sea Grant. 
Melvin, E.F. 2003. Streamer lines to reduce seabird bycatch in longline fisheries. Washington Sea Grant Program, WSG-AS 00-33. 
Melvin, E. F., B. Sullivan, G. Robertson, and B. Wienecke. 2004. A review of the effectiveness of streamer lines as a seabird bycatch mitigation 
technique in longline fisheries and CCAMLR streamer line requirements. CCAMLR Sci. 11:189-201. 
Minami, H. and Kiyota, M. 2001. Effect of blue-dyed bait on reducing incidental take of seabirds. CCSBT-ERS/0111/61. 7pp. 
Minami, H. and Kiyota, M., 2004 . Effect of blue-dyed bait and tori-pole streamer on reduction of incidental take of seabirds in the Japanese 
southern bluefin tuna longline fisheries. CCSBT-ERS/0402/08. 
Robertson, G. 2003. Fast-sinking lines reduce seabird mortality in longline fisheries. Australian Antarctic Division, Tasmania. 
Sakai, H., Hu, F., Arimoto, T. 2001. Basic study on prevention of incidental catch of seabirds in tuna longline. CCSBT-ERS/0111/62. 
Sakai, H., Fuxiang, H., Arimoto, T., 2004. Underwater setting device for preventing incidental catches of seabirds in tuna longline fishing, 
CCSBT-ERS/0402/Info06. 
Uozomi, Y. and Takeuchi, Y. 1998. Influence of tori pole on incidental catch rate of seabirds by Japanese southern bluefin tuna longline fishery in 
high seas. CCSBT-WRS/9806/9 revised. 5pp. 
Yokota, K. and Kiyota, M. 2006. Preliminary report of side-setting experiments in a large sized longline vessel. WCPFC-SC2-2006/EB WP-15. 
Paper submitted to the Second meeting of the WCPFC Ecosystem and Bycatch SWG. Manila, 10th August 2006 
 
Appendix: Seabird bycatch mitigation measures recommended by the WCPFC Scientific Committee in 
August 2006.  
 
1. All longliners should thaw their bait before it is deployed.  
2. In addition, south of 30ºS and north of 23ºN, CCMs should require their longline vessels to use at least two of 
the mitigation measures presented in Table 1, including at least one from Column A.  
 
Table 1: Recommended mitigation measures  
Column A 
Column B 
Side setting [with bird curtain] 
Tori line* 
Night setting with minimum deck lighting  
Weighted branch lines 
Tori line 
Blue-dyed bait 
 
Deep setting line shooter  
 
Bait caster 
 
Underwater setting chute 
 
Management of offal discharge 
* If tori line is selected from both column A and column B this equates to simultaneously using two (i.e. paired) tori lines. 
 
3. In other areas, where necessary, CCMs are encouraged to employ one or more of the seabird mitigation 
measures listed in Table 1.  
4. Other mitigation measures may be tested under bona fide research programmes. 
5. Every effort should be made to ensure that seabirds captured alive during longlining are released alive and that 
wherever possible hooks are removed without jeopardising the life of the seabird concerned. 
6. CCMs are encouraged to seek feedback from fishers and observers on the effectiveness and practicality of 
mitigation measures. 
7. These measures should be reviewed regularly, particularly when information becomes available on new or 
existing measures or on seabird interactions from observer or other monitoring programmes. An updated suite of 
recommended measures should then be considered. 
8. To the extent possible CCMs should endeavour to harmonise their NPOAs with these measures. 
 
 
