1 
 
 
COMMISSION 
FOURTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Manila Philippines 
3 – 7 December 2017 
South East Asia Cannery Intervention to WCPFC14 
WCPFC14-2017-OP14 
05 December 2017 
 
 
 
 
Submission by Greenpeace 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
December 5, 2017  
 
ATTN: Heads of Delegation to WCPFC 14 
 
Dear Delegates,  
 
This letter is submitted and supported by Greenpeace on behalf of Indonesian and Philippine 
canneries and Thailand brands. 
 
South East Asia Cannery Intervention to WCPFC141 
 
1. Tuna is the most economically valuable fish in the world as well as an important 
predator species in marine ecosystems. The tuna industry provides thousands of 
jobs in the catching, processing, and trading sector worldwide. Globally, commercial 
tuna is worth about USD 42 billion per year2.  
 
2. The Western and Central Pacific Ocean is the world’s largest tuna fishery, yielding 
56% of the world’s total catch in 2016. The Western Central Pacific Ocean is a very 
important resource for canneries in Southeast Asia as it produced 2,717,850 MT 
valued at $5.3 billion in 20163.  
 
3. Processors in Thailand, Philippines and Indonesia are key in efforts to achieve 
sustainability, traceability and equity. In July 2017, Greenpeace and Thai Union has 
reached an agreement4 on four issues of concern: human rights, transshipment, 
longline and FADs. Under this agreement, Thai Union has made significant and far-
reaching commitments that aim to support current best practices in fisheries, reduce 
illegal and unethical practices from global supply chains, and bring more responsibly-
caught tuna to key markets. This package of reforms position the company well to 
help build the necessary momentum towards a more sustainable, socially 
responsible and transparent industry. By the end of 2018, an independent third-party 
will review progress to-date on the commitments made in the agreement. 
Greenpeace supports the initiatives detailed in the agreement and will closely follow 
its progress and implementation.  
 
4. Processors in Southeast Asia shall be contributing towards the example set by Thai 
Union. We shall implement reforms to address human rights, transshipment, 
longline and FADs with clear milestones by 2020. We shall continue to 
undertake open and transparent dialogue with key “stakeholders5”.  
 
 
 
 
                                                
1 Statement presented, revised and agreed during Cannery Dialogues held in General Santos Philippines November 14, 2017, 
Bangkok, Thailand November 21, 2017 and Jakarta, Indonesia November 28, 2017.  
2 The Pew Charitable Trusts. Netting Billions: A Global Valuation of Tuna in the Western And Central Pacific Ocean. Fact 
Sheet. (September 23, 2016.) 
http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/fact-sheets/2016/09/netting-billions-a-valuation-of-tuna-in-the-western-and-
central-pacific-ocean 
3 Williams, P. et al. (2016) Overview of Tuna Fisheries in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, Including Economic 
Conditions 2016. https://www.wcpfc.int/node/29628 
4 http://www.greenpeace.org/international/Global/international/documents/oceans/Thai-Union-Commitments.pdf  
5 Stakeholders include Government, Fishing Companies, Labor Groups, NGOs, Traders, Consumers, Fishworkers and RFMOs 
 
2 
5. We take note of the 4,504 vessels registered in the WCPO6 where most are 
longliners or purse seiners while only a few are handliners and pole and line. We also 
take note of the top 6 countries which make up 85% of the fleet fishing in the WCPO 
are Chinese Taipei, Japan, China, Philippines, US and Korea. Delegations should 
work together towards full compliance to Conservation and Management 
Measures are enforced.  
 
6. We are of the view that Conservation and Management Measures, coupled with 
the Precautionary Approach and effective monitoring, control and surveillance 
can conserve tuna and important species such as sharks, turtles and 
endangered species. Hence, we set forth below our recommendations for the 
Commission for consideration. 
 
Recommendations 
 
Human Rights  
 
7. We are deeply concerned about issues of human rights abuses on board distant 
water fishing vessels which employ citizens in the region. We believe that the 
WCPFC is an important platform to address human rights. As such, the 
WCPFC should consider issuing an official policy statement on human rights 
and make appropriate steps to prevent such abuses. 
 
Longliners 
 
8. We strongly support proposals on “better monitoring, control and surveillance 
of longliners7.” These measures should consider: 
 
a. A ban on transshipment on the high seas 
b. Observer coverage (representational across all fleets and regions) and a 
roadmap to implement 100% fully tested electronic and human observer 
monitoring 
c. Fully automated VMS on every vessel - no manual reporting allowed 
 
Fish Aggregating Devices 
 
9. We strongly support proposals which “limits the numbers of FAD sets and the 
number of FADs released, with corresponding strong measures for reporting 
and transparency in FAD use.  Such measures should have: 
 
a. An interim limit on FAD numbers released per vessel that reduces current 
use.  
b. A reduction in the number of FAD sets. 
c. Mandatory reporting and transparency on FAD all aspects of FAD use 
d. A transition period to shift towards the use of biodegradable and non-
entangling FAD designs.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
6 As of November 29, 2017 https://www.wcpfc.int/ 
7 While the Tropical Tuna Measure doesn’t specifically address human rights issues, banning transshipment and having strong 
MCS in place on longliners will go a long way to addressing many of the problems. 
 
3 
Low Impact Fishers (Handline / Pole & Line) 
 
10. We are concerned of the adverse effects of fishing in the high seas to handliners and 
pole and liners. Tunas are shared resource. Conservation and Management 
Measures should facilitate equitable access to the resources such that there is 
reasonable opportunity not only for longliners, purse seiners but also for low impact 
fishers like handliners and pole and line. We strongly recommend, the 
participation of handliners and pole and line in the decision making processes 
at national level and the WCPFC. Their views should be taken into account in the 
crafting of Conservation and Management Measures.  
 
11. Finally, the Commission should set the lead in upholding the principles of 
inclusivity, responsibility, transparency and accountability in the decision 
making process.  
 
For more information, please contact: 
 
• 
Alliance Select Foods Int’l. on behalf of Philippine Canneries: Mr. Edward Noma 
elnoma@allianceselectfoods.com    +6326355241 
• 
Sealect Tuna Brand/ on behalf of Thailand Brands:  Miss Jaruwan Sumphanwanich 
Jaruwan.Sumphanwanich@thaiunion.com, Surasak.jintananarumit@thaiunion.com 
Tel. +66 (0)2-108-1980-1 ext.501 
• 
Asosiasi Perikanan Pole & Line dan Handline Indonesia on behalf of Indonesian 
Canneries: Ms. Janti Djuari  janti.djuari@ap2hi.org 
• 
Greenpeace Southeast Asia ephraim.batungbacal@greenpeace.org +639178663036 
 
 
 
4 
PHILIPPINES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THAILAND 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDONESIA 
 
 
  
Alliance Select Foods International 
Celebes Canning 
General Tuna Corp. 
Ocean Canning  
Philbest Canning 
Seatrade Canning 
Thai Union 
Sealect by Thai Union 
Ocean Wave by Thai Union 
TCB by Tropical Canning  
 
ROZA by Hi-Q Food Products 
Nautilus by Pataya Foods 
 
PT. International 
Alliance  
Food Indonesia 
PT. Aneka  
Tuna Indonesia 
 
PT. Samudra  
Mandiri Sentosa 
 
PT. Sinar  
Pure Foods International 
Asosiasi Perikanan Pole & Line dan Handline Indonesia 
 
