 
 
 
 
 
FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 
8-12 December 2008 
Busan, Korea      
IUCN – OPENING STATEMENT 
WCPFC5-2008/OP11 
10 December 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr Chairman, 
 
On behalf of IUCN I would like to express our appreciation on being invited to attend 
this WCPFC 5th meeting as an observer.  IUCN- The International Union for Nature 
Conservation and Natural Resources is the world’s oldest and largest global 
environmental network.  It has more than 1,000 government and NGO member 
organizations, as well as some 10,000 scientists and experts in its specialist groups from 
160 countries. Six WCFPC member countries are also National State members of IUCN 
(Australia, China, Korea, Japan, New Zealand, and United States).  
 
The mission of IUCN is to influence, encourage and assist societies throughout the 
world to conserve the integrity and diversity of nature and to ensure that any use of 
natural resources is equitable and ecologically sustainable. IUCN has been active in the 
Oceania region for many years, working through its scientific and technical 
commissions and with partners. The IUCN-Regional Programme Office for Oceania 
was established in Suva in 2005 to allow IUCN to focus more of its efforts on the 
Pacific Region.   
 
IUCN stands ready to assist in the work of the Commission related to conservation of 
resources for sustainable use.  We host six specialist commissions, whose members 
could be called upon to provide advice if required.  The four with the most relevance to 
the work of the WCFPC are: 
 
• The Commission on Environmental Law (CEL), which advances environmental 
law by developing new legal concepts and instruments, and by building the 
capacity to employ environmental law for conservation and sustainable 
development.  
 
 
2
• The Commission on Ecosystem Management (CEM) provides expert guidance 
on integrated ecosystem approaches to the management of natural and modified 
ecosystems. 
 
• The Species Survival Commission (SSC) provides advice on the technical 
aspects of species conservation and mobilizes action for those species that are 
threatened with extinction.  
 
• The World Commission on Protected Areas (WCPA) promotes the 
establishment and effective management of a worldwide representative network 
of terrestrial and marine protected areas.  
 
At the recent World Conservation Congress held in October 2008, a number of 
resolutions were passed and recommendations made in relation to oceanic fisheries. 
These sought to protect vulnerable marine ecosystems beyond national jurisdiction, 
curb illegal fishing, create marine protected area networks, and proactively manage 
human activities to prevent significant adverse effects. Over 6,000 delegates voted and 
agreed on these proposals. Those most relevant for WCPFC included:  
 
• 
Resolution 4.031, related to achieving conservation of marine biodiversity in 
areas beyond national jurisdictions; 
• 
Resolution  4.032, regarding the coordination of the Pacific Ocean 2020 
Challenge  
• 
Recommendation 4.113, on  conserving migratory and oceanic sharks   
• 
Recommendation 4.114, on a global policy against shark finning  
• 
Recommendation 4.117, related to Flag State responsibility regarding Illegal, 
Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing. 
 
The full text of these resolutions and recommendations can be found on the IUCN 
website, http://www.iucn.org/congress_08/assembly/policy/index.cfm 
 
IUCN is the only international observer organization in the United Nations General 
Assembly with expertise in issues concerning the environment, specifically 
biodiversity, nature conservation and sustainable natural resource use. In this role IUCN 
provides guidance and support to UN countries, and can therefore bring any important 
issues to the attention of the UN on behalf of WCPFC. 
 
IUCN promotes the ecosystem based approach to fisheries management, based on the 
best available scientific advice. In situations where sufficient data and information is 
not yet available, IUCN supports the use of a precautionary approach, until the requisite 
information is available. We look forward to your well considered decision   from this 
meeting with regard to the reduction in total catch of bigeye tuna by 30%, as 
recommended by the Scientific Committee, with measures starting in January 2009.  
We also look forward to well considered decisions in relation to conservation and 
management measures for turtles, sharks, yellowfin tuna and swordfish. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Busan, December 8th, 2008 
 
 
