 
COMMISSION 
 NINTH REGULAR SESSION  
Manila, Philippines 
2-6 December 2012 
ISSF POSITION STATEMENT 
WCPFC9-2012-OP6 
1-December-2012 
0800 
 
 
	  
	  
	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  ISSF	  POSITION	  STATEMENT	  
Presented	  during	  the	  9th	  Regular	  Session	  of	  the	  
Western	  and	  Central	  Pacific	  Fisheries	  Commission	  
in	  Manila,	  Philippines	  
3	  –	  7	  December	  2012
	  
	  
The	  International	  Seafood	  Sustainability	  Foundation	  (ISSF)	  is	  a	  global	  partnership	  among	  the	  tuna	  
industry,	  science	  and	  WWF,	  the	  global	  conservation	  organization.	  	  Our	  mission	  is	  to	  work	  toward	  the	  
science-­‐based	   conservation	   and	   management	   of	   tuna	   stocks	   and	   the	   protection	   of	   ocean	   health	   by	  
supporting	  regional	  fisheries	  management	  organizations	  and	  advocating	  for	  the	  recommendations	  of	  
each	  organization’s	  scientific	  advisory	  body.	  
	  
The	  first	  part	  of	  our	  statement	  addresses	  three	  of	  the	  most	  important	  issues	  facing	  global	  tuna	  
sustainability:	  reference	  points	  and	  harvest	  control	  rules,	  fleet	  capacity,	  and	  the	  management	  of	  FADs.	  	  
The	  second	  part	  addresses	  challenges	  specific	  to	  the	  WCPFC.	  
	  
	  
GLOBAL	  ISSUES	  
	  
Harvest	  Control	  Rules	  (HCRs)	  and	  Reference	  Points.	  	  HCRs	  are	  a	  set	  of	  well-­‐defined	  management	  
actions	  to	  be	  taken	  in	  response	  to	  changes	  in	  stock	  status	  with	  respect	  to	  target	  and	  limit	  reference	  
points.	   	  Unless	  there	  is	  a	  pre-­‐agreed	  upon	  action	  plan	  for	  avoiding	  overfishing	  or	  for	  rebuilding	  an	  
overfished	  stock,	  long	  negotiations	  lead	  to	  delayed	  action	  or	  inaction.	  	  This	  delay	  can	  lead	  to	  further	  
damage	  to	  the	  stock,	  requiring	  even	  more	  aggressive	  curtailing	  of	  fishing.	  	  The	  adoption	  of	  HCRs	  is	  a	  
key	  aspect	  of	  modern	  fisheries	  management,	  and	  is	  also	  a	  requirement	  of	  several	  eco-­‐label	  certification	  
programs.	  
	  
ISSF	   endorses	   the	   application	   of	   the	   Precautionary	   Approach	   using	   clear	   target	   and	   limit	   reference	  
points	   and	   HCRs,	   as	   called	   for	   by	   the	   UN	   Fish	   Stocks	   Agreement	   and	   by	   some	   RFMO	   Conventions.	  	  
While	   most	   tuna	   RFMOs	   have	   at	   least	   begun	   consideration	   of	   limit	   reference	   points	   through	   their	  
science	  committees,	  none	  have	  fully	  implemented	  these	  measures.	  	  ISSF	  urges	  all	  tuna	  RFMOs	  to	  adopt	  
stock-­‐specific	  limit	  and	  target	  reference	  points	  and	  HCRs.	  	  This	  is	  one	  of	  the	  most	  important	  actions	  
that	  RFMO	  members	  can	  take	  to	  ensure	  the	  long-­‐term	  sustainability	  of	  tuna	  stocks.	  	  
	  
Though	  seven	  years	  have	  passed	  since	  the	  Convention	  entered	  into	  force,	  the	  WCPFC	  has	  yet	  to	  adopt	  any	  
reference	   points	   in	   accordance	   with	   Article	   6.	   	   ISSF	   supports	   the	   adoption	   of	   the	   stock-­‐specific	   limit	  
reference	   points	   recommended	   by	   SC8	   and	   looks	   forward	   to	   substantial	   progress	   on	   target	   reference	  
points	   and	   HCRs	   at	   the	   upcoming	   Management	   Objectives	   Workshop.	   	   ISSF	   urges	   CCMs	   to	   give	   this	  
matter	  the	  highest	  priority	  at	  WCPFC9.	  	  	  
	  
Closed	  Vessel	  Registries	  and	  Management	  of	  Fleet	  Capacity.	  	  Experts	  agree	  that	  there	  is	  
overcapacity	  in	  the	  global	  tuna	  fleets.	  	  Fishing	  fleet	  overcapacity	  increases	  pressure	  to	  weaken	  
management	  measures	  and	  eventually	  leads	  to	  stock	  overexploitation.	  	  The	  first	  step	  towards	  
managing	  capacity	  is	  to	  establish	  limited	  entry	  via	  a	  comprehensive	  closed	  vessel	  registry	  with	  an	  eye	  
towards	  ultimately	  reducing	  the	  number	  of	  fishing	  vessels	  to	  an	  appropriate	  level.	  	  The	  IATTC	  is	  the	  
only	  tuna	  RFMO	  with	  a	  closed	  vessel	  registry,	  although	  current	  capacity	  is	  well	  in	  excess	  of	  resource	  
productivity.	  
	  
 
 
ISSF	  supports	  the	  Kobe	  III	  call	  for	  a	  freeze	  in	  purse	  seine	  fishing	  capacity	  by	  developed	  fishing	  nations	  
and	  creating	  mechanisms	  to	  transfer	  capacity	  to	  developing	  countries	  with	  aspirations	  to	  participate	  in	  
these	  fisheries.	  	  These	  steps	  should	  be	  taken	  now,	  since	  scaling	  back	  fleet	  capacity	  will	  become	  even	  
more	  difficult	  as	  new	  vessels	  are	  introduced.	  	  To	  this	  end,	  ISSF	  urges	  the	  following	  actions:	  
	  
• 
ICCAT,	  IOTC	  and	  WCPFC	  adopt	  closed	  vessel	  registries,	  especially	  for	  purse	  seine	  fleets;	  
• 
All	  tuna	  RFMOs	  develop	  capacity	  transfer	  mechanisms	  to	  allow	  for	  increased	  participation	  by	  
developing	  countries	  without	  an	  increase	  in	  overall	  capacity,	  while	  ensuring	  effective	  
monitoring	  and	  control	  of	  the	  fisheries;	  
• 
All	  tuna	  RFMOs	  establish	  rules	  for	  monitoring	  and	  managing	  the	  movement	  of	  fishing	  capacity	  
among	  the	  respective	  Convention	  Areas;	  
• 
All	  tuna	  RFMOs	  require	  unique	  vessel	  identifiers	  (such	  as	  IMO	  numbers),	  in	  order	  to	  
strengthen	  their	  ability	  to	  monitor	  fishing	  capacity	  globally	  through	  the	  Consolidated	  List	  of	  
Authorized	  Vessels	  (CLAV).	  
	  
	  
Fish	   Aggregating	   Device	   (FAD)	   Management.	   	   Setting	   on	   FADs	   accounts	   for	   nearly	   40%	   of	   global	  
tuna	  catches	  and	  50%	  of	  global	  skipjack	  catches.	  	  The	  time	  is	  ripe	  for	  a	  concerted	  global	  effort	  to	  gather	  
and	  report	  to	  RFMOs	  data	  on	  FADs	  (e.g.,	  via	  logbooks)	  in	  order	  to	  better	  monitor	  FAD	  usage	  and	  to	  
establish	  a	  sound	  basis	  for	  their	  management	  in	  every	  ocean	  region.	  	  With	  this	  information,	  scientists	  
can	  advise	  decision-­‐makers	  on	  how	  to	  reduce	  catches	  of	  small	  tunas	  and	  bycatch	  of	  non-­‐target	  species	  
that	  are	  commonly	  associated	  with	  FADs.	  	  Providing	  science	  bodies	  with	  detailed	  data	  on	  FADs	  and	  
other	  floating	  objects	  can	  also	  greatly	  improve	  their	  stock	  assessments.	  	  However,	  with	  the	  exception	  
of	  data	  collected	  through	  observer	  programs,	  there	  remains	  a	  need	  and	  opportunity	  to	  improve	  the	  
information	  about	  this	  type	  of	  fishing	  at	  the	  RFMO	  level.	  	  In	  addition	  there	  is	  a	  growing	  understanding	  
of	   best	   practices	   in	   FAD	   construction	   and	   bycatch	   mitigation	   –	   developments	   that	   ISSF	   is	   actively	  
promoting	  –	  that	  could	  be	  implemented	  in	  the	  short	  term.	  	  	  
	  
As	   noted	   in	   CMM	   2008-­‐01’s	   FAD	   Management	   Plan	   guidelines	   (Appendix	   E)	   and	   TCC5	   2009-­‐22,	   in	  
order	   to	   adequately	   monitor	   FADs,	   there	   are	   two	   primary	   types	   of	   information	   that	   need	   to	   be	  
collected	  and	  reported	  to	  RFMO	  scientific	  bodies:	  (i)	  an	  inventory	  and	  activity	  record	  of	  FADs	  (“FAD	  
logbook”:	  FAD	  markings,	  construction	  specifications,	  deployment,	  retrievals,	  etc.),	  and	  (ii)	  a	  record	  of	  
encounters	   of	   fishing	   and	   supply	   vessels	   with	   the	   FADs	   ("fishing	   logbook":	   catch,	   by	   species,	   that	  
results	  from	  sets	  made	  on	  FADs).	  	  These	  two	  types	  of	  information	  should	  be	  linked	  through	  the	  FAD	  ID	  
or	   marking.	   	   Using	   this	   data,	   RFMO	   scientific	   bodies	   can	   and	   should	   advise	   on	   any	   necessary	   FAD	  
management	  measures,	  followed	  by	  the	  development	  of	  effective	  mechanisms	  for	  implementation	  and	  
compliance	  monitoring	  by	  fishery	  managers.	  
	  
WCPFC	  CONSERVATION	  AND	  MANAGEMENT	  MEASURES	  	  
	  
1.	  CMM	  2008-­‐01	  and	  the	  Purse	  Seine	  Fishery	  
	  
The	  analyses	  presented	  at	  SC8	  corroborate	  the	  fact	  that	  CMM	  2008-­‐01	  has	  been	  ineffective	  in	  meeting	  
the	  objectives	  of	  controlling	  purse	  seine	  effort	  and	  ending	  the	  overfishing	  of	  the	  bigeye	  stock.	  	  The	  
number	  of	  purse	  seine	  fishing	  days	  continues	  to	  increase,	  and	  the	  catch	  of	  bigeye	  and	  the	  number	  of	  
FAD	  sets	  in	  2011	  were	  the	  highest	  on	  record.	  
	  
The	  results	  of	  projections	  presented	  at	  SC7	  and	  SC8	  suggest	  that	  a	  total	  seasonal	  closure	  of	  the	  purse	  
seine	  fishery,	  as	  compared	  to	  a	  FAD	  closure,	  would	  have	  only	  a	  marginal	  conservation	  gain	  for	  bigeye	  
whereas	  there	  would	  be	  a	  loss	  in	  total	  yield.	  	  ISSF	  notes,	  however,	  that	  these	  analyses	  did	  not	  consider	  	  
uncertainty	  in	  the	  implementation	  of	  either	  type	  of	  closure.	  	  ISSF	  is	  convinced	  that	  a	  total	  closure	  of	  the	  
 
 
purse	  seine	  fisheries	  (e.g.,	  for	  two	  or	  three	  months,	  at	  a	  time	  of	  the	  year	  when	  the	  catch	  rates	  of	  bigeye	  
are	   high),	   without	   exemptions,	   would	   be	   much	   easier	   to	   implement,	   monitor	   and	   enforce.	   	   ISSF	  
supports	   conservation	   measures	   as	   recommended	   by	   the	   WCPFC’s	   science	   provider	   and	  
committee,	   whether	   FAD	   closures	   or	   limits,	   or	   total	   closures,	   provided	   that	   the	   selected	  
measures	  are	  both	  fully	  enforceable	  and	  applicable	  to	  all	  participants.	  
	  
Other	  analyses	  presented	  at	  SC8	  suggest	  that	  additional	  management	  measures,	  such	  as	  limiting	  the	  
number	  of	  FAD	  sets	  made	  each	  year,	  could	  be	  used	  to	  address	  the	  problem	  of	  bigeye	  overfishing.	  	  ISSF	  
would	  support	  a	  limit	  on	  the	  number	  of	  FAD	  sets	  as	  long	  as	  it	  can	  be	  properly	  monitored	  and	  
enforced	   throughout	   the	   Convention	   Area.	   	   This	   measure	   (and	   similar	   ones	   such	   as	   individual	  
vessel	  bigeye	  limits)	  has	  obvious	  allocation	  implications	  and	  deserves	  thoughtful	  negotiation	  among	  
the	  parties	  to	  ensure	  consistent	  implementation.	  	  In	  addition,	  monitoring	  the	  accumulation	  of	  FAD	  sets	  
per	  vessel	  in	  real	  time	  could	  subject	  observers	  to	  undue	  pressure	  from	  fishers.	  
	  
The	   analyses	   reviewed	   by	   SC7	   and	   SC8	   indicate	   that	   the	   exemptions	   in	   CMM	   2008-­‐01	   account	   for	  
about	  one-­‐half	  of	  the	  overfishing	  of	  bigeye	  tuna.	  	  ISSF	  urges	  WCPFC9	  to	  eliminate	  these	  exemptions	  
and	   to	   improve	   bigeye	   data	   through	   more	   comprehensive	   reporting	   of	   catches	   by	   Indonesian	   and	  
Philippine	  fleets,	  including	  catches	  from	  all	  waters	  and	  made	  by	  all	  vessels	  under	  their	  jurisdictions.	  
	  
2.	  Sharks	  	  
	  
SC8	  concluded	  that	  the	  stock	  of	  oceanic	  whitetip	  shark	  is	  overfished	  and	  that	  substantial	  overfishing	  
is	  taking	  place	  (recent	  fishing	  mortality	  is	  6.5	  times	  higher	  than	  FMSY).	  	  The	  analyses	  for	  silky	  sharks	  
were	  inconclusive,	  but	  SC8	  recommended	  that	  fishing	  mortality	  not	  be	  allowed	  to	  increase.	  	  Since	  the	  
major	   source	   of	   mortality	   for	   both	   of	   these	   stocks	   is	   from	   non-­‐target	   fisheries,	   SC8	   concluded	   that	  
bycatch	  mitigation	  measures	  are	  the	  best	  tool	  for	  addressing	  the	  conservation	  of	  these	  two	  vulnerable	  
species.	  	  To	  augment	  WCPFC8’s	  decision	  regarding	  the	  prohibition	  on	  oceanic	  whitetips,	  ISSF	  urges	  
CCMs	   to	   consider	   more	   robust	   bycatch	   mitigation	   measures,	   improved	   data	   collection	   and	  
reporting,	  and	  the	  development	  of	  stock-­‐specific	  reference	  points.	  	  
	  
ISSF	   urges	   the	   Commission	   to	   take	   further	   steps	   to	   enforce	   the	   existing	   conservation	   and	  
management	  measure	  addressing	  shark	  finning,	  and	  move	  to	  the	  total	  prohibition	  of	  the	  at-­‐sea	  
removal	  of	  shark	  fins	  and	  mandate	  that	  fins	  remain	  naturally	  attached	  for	  all	  sharks	  landed.	  	  
ISSF	   is	   also	   asking	   all	   RFMOs,	   including	   the	   WCPFC,	   to	   adopt	   a	   prohibition	   on	  deliberate	  purse	  
seine	  setting	  around	  whale	  sharks.	  	  As	  this	  prohibition	  is	  already	  a	  requirement	  for	  those	  vessels	  
fishing	  in	  PNA	  waters,	  expanding	  the	  measure	  to	  other	  waters	  in	  the	  Convention	  Area	  is	  a	  natural	  next	  
step.	  	  It	  was	  understood	  at	  WCPFC8	  that	  a	  finalized	  measure	  would	  be	  approved	  at	  WCPFC9,	  and	  ISSF	  
looks	  forward	  to	  its	  adoption.	  
	  
3.	  Longlining	  
	  
ISSF	  notes	  with	  concern	  the	  continuing	  increase	  in	  the	  number	  of	   longline	   vessels	   operating	   in	   the	  
WCPFC	  Convention	  Area,	  the	  low	  levels	  of	  observer	  coverage,	  continuing	  transshipments	  at	  sea,	  and	  
activity	  in	  the	  High	  Seas	  beyond	  coastal	  State	  control.	  	  ISSF	  urges	  WCPFC9	  to	  impose	  and	  enforce,	  as	  
a	   precautionary	   measure,	   measures	   to	   limit	   longliner	   capacity	   in	   the	   Convention	   Area.	   	   ISSF	  
further	  urges	  the	  Commission	  to	  task	  its	  scientific	  body	  to	  make	  recommendations	  to	  WCPFC10	  
regarding	  the	  levels	  of	  longline	  capacity	  consistent	  with	  sustainable	  exploitation	  and	  prudent	  
management	  of	  target	  tuna	  stocks.	  
	  
For	  further	  information	  please	  visit	  http://www.ISS-­‐FOUNDATION.org	  
