 
 
1 
 
COMMISSION  
SIXTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea 
5-11 December 2019 
ACAP STATEMENT ON REDUCING SEABIRD BYCATCH IN PELAGIC LONGLINE 
FISHERIES 
WCPFC16-2019-OP08 
26 November 2019 
 
Submitted by Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels1 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
The incidental mortality of seabirds in pelagic longline fisheries continues to be a serious global 
concern, especially for threatened albatrosses and petrels. The need for international cooperation 
in addressing this concern was a major reason for establishing the Agreement on the Conservation 
of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP, https://acap.aq/). ACAP presented a background paper 
(WCPFC-SC15-2019/EB-IP-03) to the meeting of the Fifteenth WCPFC Scientific Committee in 
August 2019 in which we provided an update on ACAP’s advice on mitigation of seabird bycatch 
in pelagic longline fisheries. The paper summarised updated ACAP advice on mitigation and 
identified new areas of focus to address the continuing conservation crisis facing albatrosses and 
petrels, and the need for urgent and increased efforts to counter this crisis. This paper reiterates for 
the WCPFC Commission the main points made in that paper, including ACAP’s continuing 
emphasis on exploring with our colleagues in Regional Fisheries Management Organizations, and 
others, ways to work together more effectively to reduce bycatch of albatrosses and petrels in 
fishing operations and improve the conservation status of these threatened seabirds. 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 Secretariat to the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels, Level 2, 119 Macquarie Street, Hobart, 7000, 
Tasmania, Australia. christine.bogle@acap.aq 
 
 
 
2 
Introduction and background 
The incidental mortality of seabirds in pelagic longline fisheries continues to be a serious global 
concern, especially for threatened albatrosses and petrels. The need for international cooperation 
in addressing this concern was a major reason for establishing the Agreement on the Conservation 
of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP). There have been significant efforts internationally to develop 
mitigation measures to avoid or minimise the risk of incidental catch of seabirds in longline 
fisheries. Although most mitigation measures are broadly applicable, the application and 
specifications of some will vary with local methods and gear configurations. ACAP routinely 
reviews the scientific literature dealing with seabird bycatch mitigation in pelagic longline 
fisheries. ACAP recognises that factors such as safety, practicality and the characteristics of the 
fishery should also be taken into account when considering the efficacy of seabird bycatch 
mitigation measures and consequently in the development of advice and guidelines on best 
practice. The most recent review was conducted in May 2019 at the Ninth Meeting of the ACAP 
Seabird Bycatch Working Group, with the recommendations of the review adopted by the Eleventh 
Meeting of its Advisory Committee. Paper WCPFC-SC15-2019/EB-IP-03 provided details of 
ACAP’s updated advice. 
 
The main outcomes of the 2019 ACAP meetings 
In the first two weeks of May 2019 ACAP held, in Florianópolis, Brazil, the 11th meeting of its 
Advisory Committee, preceded by meetings of its Working Groups on Seabird Bycatch and on 
Population and Conservation Status. These meetings discussed priorities for ACAP’s work 
programme, including its engagement with RFMOs – a key element of ACAP’s work. The reports 
from these the meetings are available on the ACAP website: 
11th meeting of ACAP's Advisory Committee (AC11) 
Ninth meeting of ACAP's Seabird Bycatch Working Group (SBWG9) 
Fifth meeting of ACAP's Population and Conservation Status Working Group (PaCSWG5)  
 
ACAP's advice for reducing the impact of pelagic longline fisheries on seabirds was reviewed and 
updated at the 2019 meetings. The updates were relatively minor, and the current version of 
ACAP's advice is available on the ACAP website.  
 
ACAP has developed and adopted new advice on improving safety when hauling branchlines 
during pelagic fishing operations, which can be downloaded from the ACAP website. Also 
available on the ACAP website are guidelines for removing fishing hooks from bycaught birds. 
Additional information on safe handling and release guidelines for seabirds is provided in 
WCPFC-SC15-2019-EB-WP-10. As noted in EB-WP-10, intersessional work is underway to 
develop safe handling and release guidelines for birds entangled in nets. This will be relevant to 
capture of live birds in purse seine nets. ACAP continues to update the ACAP-BirdLife bycatch 
mitigation fact sheets, and an updated Seabird Bycatch Identification Guide will also be available 
soon.  
 
 
 
3 
The 2019 ACAP meetings highlighted the urgency of addressing the conservation crisis that 
continues to be faced by albatrosses and petrels, with fisheries bycatch remaining a primary threat. 
ACAP’s efforts to counter this crisis will involve a change of focus in some cases and taking 
advantage of ongoing innovations in, for example, technology. Some of these efforts will be 
relevant to ACAP’s interaction with RFMOs such as the WCPFC, since the only way to tackle the 
crisis is by working together.  
 
Some of the particular concerns and points of discussion by ACAP Parties in relation to seabird 
bycatch and its mitigation include the following: 
• Disappointment that, despite all the research and attention devoted to the development of 
best practice bycatch mitigation measures, these have not been used sufficiently 
extensively to stop the decline in the numbers of many albatross and petrel species. 
• The meeting considered it sufficiently important to spend considerable time discussing why 
there had been insufficient uptake of best practice or even implementation of required 
bycatch mitigation measures.  
• The discussion acknowledged that many RFMOs and national authorities have put in place 
at least some measures to reduce seabird bycatch, but that compliance and enforcement 
were often inadequate. ACAP is now giving a greater focus to working with others to 
identify ways of strengthening compliance with conservation measures adopted. 
Compliance with required seabird bycatch mitigation measures is an area that needs much 
greater attention. ACAP is keen to assist where it can to contribute ideas on how to improve 
monitoring and compliance, including through the development of innovative methods.  
• We are encouraged by the fact that within jurisdictions where enforcement has occurred, 
reductions in seabird bycatch were demonstrated, sometimes dramatically so, and without 
the perceived detrimental consequences arising. This is a clear indication that the crisis can 
be successfully addressed.  
 
One of our immediate objectives is to communicate urgently the message that albatrosses and 
petrels are in a dire conservation state, and that urgent action is required to improve their status. 
We also want to give greater emphasis to success stories, to convey the message that through 
cooperation and sharing our experience, we can work together to solve the conservation crisis,  
 
The WCPFC has recognised the need to reduce seabird bycatch and recently adopted WCPFC 
Conservation and Management Measure to mitigate the impact of fishing for highly migratory fish 
stocks on seabirds (CMM 2018/03). Arguably the single most important action to reduce bycatch 
is to increase compliance in the proper use of existing seabird bycatch regulations, such as WCPFC 
CMM 2018/03.  
 
World Albatross Day, to be celebrated for the first time on 19 June 2020, will be one opportunity 
to highlight the efforts being made and the immediacy of making sure they succeed. 
