 
COMMISSION 
 NINTH REGULAR SESSION  
Manila, Philippines 
2-6 December 2012 
PEW Position Paper to WCPFC9 
WCPFC9-2012-OP04 
 26 November 2012 
 
 
2005 Market Street Suite 1700         
Philadelphia, PA 1903-7077  
           
 
 
901 E Street NW, 10th Floor              
 
 
 
Washington, DC 20004   
                 
Square du Bastion 1a boîte 5           
                                                                                    1050 Brussels Belgium 
 
Studio 10, Tiger House                 
                                                                    Burton Street 
 
                                               London WC1H BY United Kingdom 
                                                           
                                                                                                      
16 November, 2012 
 
Dear Sir or Madam,  
 
I am writing on behalf of the Pew Environment Group, in regards to the discussions that will take place 
at the upcoming 9th Regular Session of the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) in 
Manila, Philippines.  
 
The WCPFC has a unique and important responsibility as custodian of the world’s largest tuna fishery in 
an area covering 20 percent of the Earth’s surface.  This responsibility requires strong conservation and 
management actions through joint commitments and compliance. Unfortunately, Commission 
Members, Cooperating Non-members, and Participating Territories (CCMs, collectively) have failed to 
take sufficient actions in recent meetings.  
 
At the 8th Regular Session of the WCPFC (WCPFC 8) in Guam earlier this year, CCMs were unable to reach 
consensus on more than a one year conservation measure for the tropical tuna fishery.  National 
positions and interests took precedence over making difficult yet critical management decisions, and the 
stewardship of the world’s most valuable tuna fishery took a step back. Further, even with a mandate to 
protect sharks and clear scientific evidence of the need for action for several species, CCMs took 
meaningful action on only one shark species.  
 
All WCPFC CCMs must be willing to compromise from their current positions to ensure that this does not 
happen again and that clear, multiyear action is taken at WCPFC 9 in December. This year’s meeting is 
critical for the future of bigeye and Pacific bluefin tuna and many shark species in the Western and 
Central Pacific Ocean.  
 
Please take a moment to view our WCPFC policy statement and a short video featuring Pew’s policy 
experts and footage from the region. Click on the image below to watch Pew’s WCPFC9 video. 
 
 
2 
 
In particular, the Pew Environment Group calls CCMs to take the following actions at the 9th Regular 
Session of the Commission: 
 
 
Adopt an Effective Conservation and Management Measure (CMM) for Tropical Tunas that ends 
overfishing of bigeye tuna 
o Catch fewer juvenile bigeye by limiting the use of fish aggregating devices (FADs) to 2010 
levels 
o Catch fewer adult bigeye and more accurately report longline catch 
o Maintain and expand high seas pocket closures 
o Implement a compliance regime with CMMs 
 
Implement Catch Limits and Improve Monitoring and Transparency 
o Improve FAD management 
o Establish target and limit reference points for all WCPFC-managed tuna species 
 
Implement science-based catch limits for Pacific bluefin tuna 
o Increase the transparency of the International Scientific Committee (ISC) for Tuna and Tuna-
like Species in the North Pacific Ocean scientific process 
 
Adopt Conservation and Management Measures to Protect Sharks 
o Prohibit the retention of silky and hammerhead sharks  
o Prohibit purse seine vessels from intentionally setting nets around whale sharks 
o Mandate the use of shark bycatch mitigation methods  
o Prohibit the removal of shark fins at sea to improve enforcement of the shark finning ban 
 
Strengthen Controls Against Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) Fishing 
o Improve port State measures to deter IUU fishing activities 
o Require International Maritime Organization (IMO) numbers for vessels over 24 meters in 
length and 100 gross tonnes in weight operating in the WCPFC area 
o Review and strengthen WCPFC controls for transshipment at sea and require all vessels, 
including those within EEZs in the Convention Area, to comply with the WCPFC’s vessel 
monitoring and surveillance (VMS) rules  
 
We look forward to working with you and your delegation in Manila to agree on new conservation and 
management measures that end overfishing of bigeye and Pacific bluefin tuna, protect sharks, and 
strengthen controls to ensure legal and regulated fishing based on sound science.  
 
Please feel free to contact me anytime at gleape@pewtrusts.org.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Gerry Leape  
Senior Officer, International Policy  
The Pew Environment Group 
 
POLICY
STATEMENT
REcoMMENdATioNS To ThE 9Th REgulAR SESSioN of 
ThE WESTERN ANd cENTRAl PAcific fiShERiES 
coMMiSSioN (WcPfc)
dEcEMbER 2–6, 2012   |   MANilA, PhiliPPiNES
WCPFC— 
IT’S TIME TO MAKE IT WORK
I  2
POLICY 
STATEMENT
Yellowfin tuna, © C and M Fallows
POLICY 
STATEMENT
REcoMMENdATioNS
The Pew Environment Group calls on Members, Cooperating Non-members, and Participating Territories 
(CCMs, collectively) of the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) to take the 
following critical actions at the 9th Regular Session of the Commission:
 
 1. Adopt an Effective conservation and Management Measure (cMM) for Tropical Tunas that  
   
Ends overfishing of bigeye Tuna 
   
1.1 Catch fewer juvenile bigeye by limiting the use of fish aggregating devices (FADs) to 2010 levels
   
1.2 Catch fewer adult bigeye and more accurately report longline catch
   
1.3 Maintain and expand high seas pocket closures
   
1.4 Implement a compliance regime with CMMs
 2. implement catch limits and improve Monitoring and Transparency
   
2.1 Improve FAD management
   
2.2 Establish target and limit reference points for all WCPFC-managed tuna species
   
 
2.2.1 Implement science-based catch limits for Pacific bluefin tuna
   
2.3 Increase the transparency of the International Scientific Committee (ISC) for Tuna and Tuna-like  
   
 
Species in the North Pacific Ocean scientific process
 3. Adopt conservation and Management Measures to Protect Sharks
   
3.1 Prohibit the retention of silky and hammerhead sharks 
   
3.2 Prohibit purse seine vessels from intentionally setting nets around whale sharks
   
3.3 Mandate the use of shark bycatch mitigation methods 
   
3.4 Prohibit the removal of shark fins at sea to improve enforcement of the shark finning ban
 4. Strengthen controls Against illegal, unreported, and unregulated (iuu) fishing
   
4.1 Improve port State measures to deter IUU fishing activities
   
4.2 Require International Maritime Organization (IMO) numbers for vessels of 100 gross tonnes or  
   
 
more or 24 meters or greater operating in the WCPFC area
   
4.3 Review and strengthen WCPFC controls for transshipment at sea and require all vessels,  
 
   
 
including those within EEZs in the Convention Area, to comply with the WCPFC’s vessel  
 
   
 
monitoring and surveillance (VMS) rules 
I  3
I  4
POLICY 
STATEMENT
WcPfc—iT’S TiME To MAkE iT WoRk
The Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) has a unique and important 
responsibility as custodian of the world’s largest tuna fishery in an area covering 20 percent 
of the Earth’s surface. The WCPFC aims to ensure the long-term conservation and sustainable 
use of the fish stocks in the western and central Pacific Ocean (WCPO). The Commission is also 
the Regional Fisheries Management Organization (RFMO) with the clearest mandate to protect 
sharks. These responsibilities require strong conservation and management actions through 
joint commitments and compliance. Unfortunately, the Commission’s Members, Cooperating 
Non-members, and Participating Territories (CCMs, collectively) have failed to take the needed 
actions in recent meetings. 
At the 8th Regular Session of the WCPFC (WCPFC8) earlier this year, CCMs were unable to reach 
consensus on conservation action for the tropical tuna fishery. National positions and interests took 
precedence over difficult yet critical management decisions, and stewardship of the world’s most 
valuable tuna fishery took a step back. Further, even with a mandate to protect sharks and with clear 
scientific evidence of the need for action on several species, CCMs took meaningful action on only 
one shark species. All WCPFC members share a responsibility to ensure that this does not happen 
again and to take clear action at WCPFC9 in December. 
This year’s meeting is critical for the future of bigeye and Pacific bluefin tuna and many shark species 
in the WCPO. Governments must come together to agree on conservation and management 
measures that end overfishing of bigeye tuna, protect sharks, and strengthen controls to ensure legal 
and regulated fishing based on sound science.
Silky shark, © Chris and Monique Fallows
I  5
POLICY 
STATEMENT
1. AdoPT AN EffEcTivE coNSERvATioN ANd MANAgEMENT MEASuRE (cMM) foR 
TRoPicAl TuNAS ThAT ENdS ovERfiShiNg of bigEyE TuNA 
Although all CCMs play a critical role in ensuring the overall health of fisheries and the broader 
ecosystem, there has been a clear lack of leadership in the WCPO on the issue of bigeye tuna 
conservation. The longline fishery for this species is worth hundreds of millions of dollars and is 
closely linked with other ecosystem conservation considerations, such as catches of turtles, sharks, 
and seabirds. 
Overfishing of bigeye tuna continues, and only a multipronged management measure can address 
the problem effectively. To date, WCPFC members have adopted actions such as fish aggregating 
device (FAD) closures and longline reductions that help decrease bigeye mortality. In recent 
discussions at the 9th Regular Session of the Technical and Compliance Committee (TCC9) earlier 
this year, many governments took the view that they have made a sufficient contribution and that 
further action must come from somewhere else. However, according to the Scientific Committee, 
“measures that reduce fishing mortality across a range of fish sizes (e.g. fishing gear) are likely to 
produce the best results”.1 This means that all WCPFC members must do more to reduce mortality if 
a new CMM is to end overfishing. Given that the vast majority of bigeye tuna fishing mortality comes 
from purse seiners using FADs and from longline fisheries, any new measure must focus on further 
reducing mortality from both of these gears. Effective management can be achieved only by joint 
action based on strong scientific advice and a commitment to compliance. 
1.1 cATch fEWER juvENilE bigEyE by liMiTiNg fAd uSE To 2010 lEvElS
FAD closures have been effective in reducing bigeye tuna catch during the closure period, but 
unrestricted FAD use in the non-closure period resulted in a record number of FAD sets in 2011.2 The 
8th Session of the Scientific Committee (SC8) recommended limiting FAD sets to 2010 levels to end 
overfishing of bigeye. In practical terms, this means capping the number of FAD sets in a given year 
to about 15,000, according to the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC). Certain CCMs, such as 
Japan, have already taken steps to reduce their numbers of FAD sets, and it is time for other CCMs to 
follow Japan’s example and for the Commission to adopt a firm limit.
1.2 cATch fEWER AdulT bigEyE ANd MoRE AccuRATEly REPoRT loNgliNE cATch
Until fewer bigeye tuna are caught and until misreporting in the longline fishery is addressed, 
CMMs will continue to fall short of their objectives, scientists will have incomplete and inaccurate 
data for stock assessments, and potential benefits from maintaining sustainable stocks in the 
region will be undermined.
Longline vessels have the most to gain from bigeye conservation and stand to lose the most if bigeye 
populations decrease further. SC8 recommends reductions in fishing mortality across all gears, 
including longlines, to end overfishing of bigeye. A continuation of the advice in 2008-01 would 
achieve the required mortality reduction, but misreporting of target catch remains a widespread 
compliance issue in the region and continues to undermine CMMs.3 
I  6
POLICY 
STATEMENT
To fully address these problems, 100 percent of the longline fishing activity in WCPFC fisheries 
should be observed. However, we recognize that 100 percent observer coverage is unrealistic in the 
near term. Given the high impact that large-scale freezer longliners have on target, associated, and 
dependent species, the WCPFC should mandate 100 percent observer coverage on these vessels. 
Pew also recommends that the WCPFC increase coverage levels on all other longliners to at least 20 
percent, in accordance with the best available scientific advice.4 The WCPFC should also investigate 
the potential for use of electronic observer systems as an alternative to human observers.
Bigeye tuna and FAD, © M Ushioda SeaPics 
POLICY 
STATEMENT
lEAdERShiP iS NEEdEd oN bigEyE TuNA coNSERvATioN EffoRTS
Although all CCMs play a critical role in ensuring the overall health of fisheries and the broader ecosystem, 
there has been a clear lack of leadership on the issue of bigeye conservation. The bigeye tuna longline fishery 
is worth hundreds of millions of dollars and is closely linked with other ecosystem conservation issues, such as 
catches of turtles, sharks, and seabirds. 
According to Article 30 of its Convention, the WCPFC must implement measures to ensure that a 
disproportionate burden of conservation action is not placed on developing States Parties, and territories 
and possessions. In short, the WCPFC CCMs that benefit the most from bigeye fishing should lead 
conservation efforts. However, many of those CCMs have argued that further cuts by their longliners would 
be an unfair hardship. According to economic statistics, however, the value of the catch from the top five 
bigeye-catching CCMs has increased by more than 17 percent since 2008 (when the previous measure was 
adopted), compared with a cumulative 3.8 percent decline in value for all other CCMs and cooperating non-
members (CNM).
Within the WCPFC, five CCMs gain most of the benefits from the bigeye longline fishery: They receive 84 
percent of the value, or “benefit”, from bigeye fishing. These CCMs also have significant purse seine fleets 
that fish on FADs. These CCMs should lead holistic conservation initiatives that limit FAD use and reduce 
longline effort, in line with the spirit of the WCPFC and the letter of its treaty. 
Table 1: ccMs that benefit the most from bigeye tuna in longline and purse seine fisheries
ccMs that benefit the most from 
bigeye tuna 
value of longline 
bigeye landed in 
20115  
(in millions of uSd)
value of bigeye 
tuna catch in 2008 
(in millions of uSd)
change in value 
since 2008
Republic of Korea
195
141
35.4%
Japan
158
162
- 2.5%
Chinese Taipei
133
126
5.6%
China
116
89
30.3%
United States
50
39
28.2%
Total value of catch of top 5  
bET catchers
652
557
17.1%
Total value of bET catch of all other 
ccMs and cNMs in WcPfc
125
130
-3.8%
I  7
I  8
POLICY 
STATEMENT
1.3 MAiNTAiN ANd ExPANd high SEAS PockET cloSuRES
High seas pocket closures should be maintained until measures to prevent and deter illegal, 
unregulated, and unreported (IUU) activity in those areas, which are complementary to in-zone 
measures, are implemented effectively. Opening the pockets without those measures would 
weaken monitoring, control, and surveillance (MCS) and increase the region’s vulnerability to IUU 
activities. The closures should also be expanded to cover longline fisheries until strengthened 
transshipment measures are fully implemented. 
1.4 iMPlEMENT A coMPliANcE REgiME WiTh cMMS
Noncompliance with CMMs threatens fish populations and associated and dependent species, 
as well as the very credibility of the WCPFC. It also undermines the activities of those who play by 
the rules. To ensure that CCMs are fully accountable for their fishing activities, the WCPFC should 
agree to implement a comprehensive and transparent compliance regime that systematically 
reviews fishing activities and automatically imposes appropriate penalties on CCMs that violate 
conservation and management measures. This process should be open and transparent to all 
WCPFC observers so that civil society can learn how all parties are carrying out their stewardship 
responsibilities for the Pacific’s highly migratory species.
2. iMPlEMENT cATch liMiTS ANd iMPRovE MoNiToRiNg ANd TRANSPARENcy 
WCPFC CCMs have an opportunity this year to strengthen management across multiple fisheries 
by committing to critical articles of the WCPF Convention, notably Article 5 on the principles and 
measures for conservation and management, Article 6 on the application of the precautionary 
approach, and Article 21 on transparency. Specifically, this can be accomplished by managing and 
monitoring the use of FADs, setting target and limit reference points for tuna fisheries, and improving 
transparency in management of fisheries in the North Pacific, especially for Pacific bluefin tuna.
2.1 iMPRovE fAd MANAgEMENT 
CCM compliance with FAD management requirements has been extremely poor, as noted in 
WCPFC-TCC7-2011-OB-016, and the uncontrolled proliferation of FADs must be addressed as a 
matter of priority. In addition to limiting FAD sets, CCMs fishing with FADs should be required to 
submit management plans and information on FAD numbers (deployed, recovered, lost) so that 
the Scientific Committee has better information on extent of use, potential ecosystem impacts 
associated with the uncontrolled proliferation, and marine debris data. Moreover, the use of FADs 
may give fishing operators access to fishing areas beyond their license, including EEZs where they 
are not authorized to fish. In this context, FADs could enable a form of IUU fishing, and it is therefore 
critical to develop MCS tools to regulate and control them. 
FAD management requirements should be clearly stipulated, in line with the recent International 
Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) resolution 31 (WCC-2012-Res-031-EN) on tuna 
management. The motion urged RFMOs and IUCN State and government agency Members with 
vessels fishing on drifting FADs to take the following actions on FAD management:
I  9
POLICY 
STATEMENT
a. 
Develop and submit to their respective RFMOs FAD management plans that are standard across 
fleets and regions so that RFMO scientific committees have better information on the extent of 
their use, potential ecosystem impacts associated with the uncontrolled proliferation of drifting 
FADs, and marine debris information.
b. Undertake research and scientific trials to determine how to reduce catch of nontarget species 
when fishing on drifting FADs.
2.2 ESTAbliSh TARgET ANd liMiT REfERENcE PoiNTS foR All WcPfc-MANAgEd 
TuNA SPEciES 
Article 6 of the WCPFC Convention states, “In applying the precautionary approach, the members of 
the Commission shall: (a) apply the guidelines set out in Annex II of the Agreement…and determine, 
on the basis of the best scientific information available, stock-specific reference points and the action 
to be taken if they are exceeded”. 
The 2012 Management Objectives Workshop was a first step to implementing this critical 
requirement. WCPFC CCMs should adopt interim target and limit reference points, building off the 
outcomes of the Management Objectives Workshop, various papers presented at SC8, and Working 
Paper WCPFC-TCC7-2011-01. Further discussion on reference points and harvest control rules should 
continue to ensure that limit reference points have a low chance of being exceeded and that targets 
achieve the desired outcomes. 
2.2.1 Implement science-based catch limits for Pacific bluefin tuna
The Pacific bluefin tuna fishery is now the world’s largest, with the majority of the catch taken in 
WCPFC waters. However, management has not kept up with the growth of the fishery, overfishing 
is occurring, and preliminary results from the 2012 assessment indicate the continued decline of the 
species.7 The Northern Committee should convene in Manila to review the results of the latest 
stock assessment and adopt science-based catch limits for implementation in 2013. This is a 
critical starting point for the process of setting target and limit reference points for Pacific bluefin. 
The WCPFC should also implement measures to reduce juvenile catch, as recommended by the 
International Scientific Committee for Tuna and Tuna-like Species in the North Pacific Ocean (ISC), by 
adopting a minimum size of 30 kg with a 40 percent tolerance for undersized fish.
Pacific Bluefin, © Richard Hermann
I  10
2.3 iNcREASE ThE TRANSPARENcy of ThE iSc SciENTific PRocESS
The WCPFC relies on the ISC to provide scientific stock assessments for the species managed by the 
Northern Committee, including Pacific bluefin tuna. This year, however, the ISC failed to complete 
the bluefin assessment in a timely manner, leaving the Northern Committee without the critical 
scientific information needed to recommend effective catch limits and complementary management 
measures. The ISC also lacks transparency in its process, refusing to admit nongovernmental 
observers to meetings and declining to share its assessment reports. Its failure to release its stock 
assessment documents and reports also poses problems for the Scientific Committee, as was the 
case with the North Pacific striped marlin assessment this year. These actions are not consistent with 
the high standards under which the WCPFC operates. It should consider other, more transparent 
arrangements such as working with the SPC to assess northern stocks going forward.
3. AdoPT coNSERvATioN ANd MANAgEMENT MEASuRES To PRoTEcT ShARkS
Sharks are among the ocean’s most vulnerable animals. According to the IUCN Red List of 
Threatened Species, 143 shark species are threatened or near threatened with extinction. Even 
though the WCPFC is the most modern of the tuna RFMOs and has the clearest mandate to protect 
species within its jurisdiction, it has taken meaningful action on only one shark species. The WCPFC 
must act to ensure that targeted fishing and bycatch do not deplete shark populations and drive 
them to extinction.
3.1 PRohibiT ThE RETENTioN of Silky ANd hAMMERhEAd ShARkS 
The 2012 stock assessments for silky sharks (Carcharhinus falciformis) show that they are overfished 
and that overfishing is occurring in the WCPO.8, 9 Although the Scientific Committee determined 
that management advice could not be provided because of concerns about data and biases in the 
assessment, it did note that some basic fisheries indicators are showing declines in recent years. It 
also recommended mitigation measures to reduce the impact of nontarget fisheries on this species.10 
Because the best available science shows that silky sharks are overfished and that overfishing is 
occurring, retention of silky sharks should be prohibited while efforts are made to improve the 
stock assessment.
Scalloped (Sphyrna lewini), smooth (Sphyrna zygaena) and great (Sphyrna mokarran) hammerhead 
sharks are species of significant global concern and have recently been proposed for inclusion on 
Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora (CITES). These species of hammerheads, along with the winghead shark (Eusphyra blochii), are 
among the 13 Key Shark Species identified by the WCPFC. Unfortunately, no resources are assigned 
to these species under the Shark Research Plan (SRP), and no assessments are planned. 
Although little is known about the status of hammerhead populations in the WCPO, an assessment 
off the east coast of Australia found that catch rates of hammerheads have decreased by more 
than 85 percent over 44 years.11 Because of significant concerns about the status of hammerhead 
populations, and because no scientific assessment or advice is expected in the near future, 
the WCPFC should prohibit the retaining on board, transshipping, storing, and landing of 
hammerhead sharks.
POLICY 
STATEMENT
I  11
POLICY 
STATEMENT
3.2 PRohibiT PuRSE SEiNE vESSElS fRoM iNTENTioNAlly SETTiNg NETS ARouNd 
WhAlE ShARkS
The practice of setting purse seines on whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) in the WCPO is a significant 
concern. The observed interaction and mortality rates imply that total whale shark mortalities in the 
purse seine fishery were approximately 56 animals in 2009 and 19 animals in 2010.12 
Mortality occurs in approximately one in every 10 sets involving a whale shark interaction.13 To 
protect these slow-moving, vulnerable sharks, the WCPFC should prohibit purse seine vessels from 
intentionally setting nets around whale sharks in the convention area. Further, because whale sharks 
rarely escape unassisted before the net is closed, vessel operators must be required to safely release 
entangled whale sharks.
The Pew Environment Group supports the SC8 recommendation that the whale shark be defined as a 
Key Shark Species of the WCPFC. Although this designation and an eventual stock assessment would 
be a useful endeavor, immediate action is needed to reduce whale shark mortality, and we urge 
the WCPFC to prohibit the intentional setting of purse seine nets on whale sharks. 
Whale shark, © Olivier Roux/Marine Photobank
I  12
3.3 MANdATE ThE uSE of ShARk bycATch MiTigATioN METhodS 
Shark bycatch in WCPFC fisheries is detrimental to the survival of many populations of these 
animals. Their life history characteristics make them extremely susceptible to fishing pressure, 
and the recovery potential for depleted shark species is significantly lower than that of other 
fish species. Bycatch of oceanic whitetip (Carcharhinus longimanus) and silky sharks is of special 
concern considering the recent assessments showing that the populations are overfished and that 
overfishing is occurring. The status of blue sharks is also a matter of concern. Pew supports SC8’s 
recommendation that bycatch mitigation measures be put in place. 
Many longline vessels use wire leaders (also known as steel traces) to secure their catch on lines. 
Shark bycatch is higher on longlines that use wire leaders, because sharks are unable to break 
through the wire to escape. Thus the use of wire leaders creates a de facto targeted but unregulated 
shark fishery. Prohibiting wire leaders is a clear solution for reducing shark bycatch in longline 
fisheries. In addition, the use of monofilament can actually increase the catch of some target species 
such as tuna and swordfish.14, 15 For example, research undertaken off the northeast Australian coast 
showed that monofilament leaders catch more target species (with a statistically increased catch of 
bigeye tuna), thereby increasing earnings per trip, while wire leaders catch more sharks. The study 
showed a clear financial incentive for fishers to use nylon leaders: The longliners deploying only nylon 
leaders made approximately US$8,000 more per year than did longliners fishing with wire leaders.16 
Sharks that are brought next to the vessel alive when the fishing gear is retrieved can easily be freed 
with the use of line cutters. Thus a prohibition on wire leaders would also facilitate compliance with 
the WCPFC’s CMM 2010–07 paragraph 10, which says that “CCMs shall take measures to encourage 
the release of live sharks that are caught incidentally and are not used for food or other purposes”. 
Gear modifications, such as the use of single monofilament nylon leaders, should be mandated so 
that fewer sharks are caught as bycatch in WCPFC tuna fisheries. 
3.4 PRohibiT ThE REMovAl of ShARk fiNS AT SEA To iMPRovE ENfoRcEMENT of 
ThE ShARk fiNNiNg bAN
The WCPFC’s ban on shark finning—the wasteful practice of slicing off a shark’s fins and discarding 
the body at sea—contains loopholes that hamper enforcement. The ban can be strengthened by 
prohibiting the removal of shark fins at sea, which would also facilitate collection of species-specific 
catch data and help ensure compliance with existing WCPFC conservation and management 
measures for sharks. 
4. STRENgThEN coNTRolS AgAiNST illEgAl, uNREPoRTEd, ANd uNREgulATEd  
(iuu) fiShiNg
IUU fishing continues to be a serious concern in the WCPFC area, where the practice exacerbates 
overfishing, undermines conservation measures, and threatens food security for coastal communities. 
POLICY 
STATEMENT
I  13
4.1 iMPRovE PoRT STATE MEASuRES To dETER iuu fiShiNg AcTiviTiES
A 2009 project to develop a Regional Monitoring, Control, and Surveillance Strategy for Pacific 
oceanic fisheries concluded that the majority of IUU activity in the region is associated with licensed 
vessels. The project identified inadequate reporting as an area of concern and underlined the 
need to strengthen catch monitoring and validation throughout the supply chain.17 In this context, 
port State measures (PSMs) have proved to be effective at preventing the entry of illegal fish into 
the market and in removing the economic incentive for IUU fishing operators to continue with their 
activities. The United Nations General Assembly has urged States to ratify the Food and Agriculture 
Organization’s Port State Measures Agreement (PSMA) of 2009, cooperate through RFMOs, and 
adopt all necessary port State measures.18 In addition, States at Rio+20 agreed to expedite national 
processes to ratify the PSMA and implement measures that identify vessels engaged in IUU fishing.19 
The WCPFC’s Performance Review Report recommended that “in considering Port State Measures, 
the Commission should take into account minimum standards in the PSMA, measures and practices 
of other RFMOs in implementing such standards and developments in the broader system of Port 
controls”.20 Analysis conducted by the Pew Environment Group comparing the PSMs in the WCPFC 
with those established by the PSMA revealed a number of gaps in the WCPFC’s PSMs, such as 
no comprehensive inspection scheme, no requirement for vessels to provide information before 
entering ports, and no prohibition of port entry to IUU vessels.21 
The Pew Environment Group is aware that a number of WCPFC CCMs will need time to fully 
implement the provisions of the PSMA. However, the WCPFC should initiate constructive action 
toward the development of stronger control measures by gradually adopting enhanced PSMs. In 
this context, the European Union’s proposal discussed at TCC8, for a CMM to establish a WCPFC 
scheme for minimum standards for inspection in port, offers a good basis for progress that would 
complement the MCS minimum standards already applicable in the region. In addition, the proposal 
recognizes the needs and requirements of Small Island developing states and territories. Providing 
support to developing States to effectively implement PSMs will be crucial to the effectiveness of a 
new regional port inspection scheme. Any efforts in this direction should take into account existing 
initiatives in the region, such as the ACP Fish II Programme.23
POLICY 
STATEMENT
Micronesia © Adam Baske, Pew
I  14
4.2 REquiRE iMo NuMbERS foR vESSElS of 100 gRoSS ToNNES oR MoRE oR 24 
METERS oR gREATER oPERATiNg iN ThE WcPfc AREA
The implementation of unique vessel identifiers (UVIs) for tuna vessels is critical to increase transparency 
in the fisheries sector and to enhance coordinated action against IUU fishing operators. The only fully 
developed and currently used UVI is the International Maritime Organization (IMO) number, provided 
through registry with the IHS Fairplay ship numbering scheme (previously Lloyd’s Register).24
In accordance with the recommendations of Kobe III25 and the WCPFC’s Performance Review 
Report,26 the WCPFC should require any fishing and support vessel of 100 gross tonnes (GT) or 
24 meters or greater that is authorized to operate in the Convention Area to register with the IHS 
Fairplay ship numbering system and obtain an IMO number. This number should be on record, used 
in all relevant communications, and made publicly available.27 
4.3 REviEW ANd STRENgThEN WcPfc coNTRolS foR TRANSShiPMENT AT SEA ANd 
REquiRE All vESSElS, iNcludiNg ThoSE WiThiN EEZS iN ThE coNvENTioN AREA, To 
coMPly WiTh ThE WcPfc’S vESSEl MoNiToRiNg ANd SuRvEillANcE (vMS) RulES 
At-sea transshipment, especially on the high seas, is commonly used around the globe to launder 
IUU catch. Therefore, high seas transshipment needs to be limited and strictly controlled. Pew 
supports the recommendation from TCC8 that the WCPFC’s high seas transshipment rules be 
reviewed in 2013 with the aim of strengthening them at WCPFC10. 
In addition, all WCPFC CCMs should comply with VMS rules as set forth by Article 24(8) of the 
WCPF Convention and CMM 2007-02.28 The current loophole in the Commission’s MCS system, 
which allows for certain vessels to “disappear” while in coastal states’ EEZs by not requiring 
VMS reporting, must be closed as a matter of priority to prevent and deter IUU fishing within the 
Convention Area. 
POLICY 
STATEMENT
Skipjack tuna, © M Ushioda SeaPics
I  15
POLICY 
STATEMENT
ENdNoTES
1 
Summary Report of Scientific Committee’s 7th Regular Session to the Commission for the Conservation and Management of Highly 
Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, 2011, http://www.wcpfc.int/node/3403
2 
Summary Report of Scientific Committee’s 8th Regular Session to the Commission for the Conservation and Management of Highly 
Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, 2011. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/4054
3 
“Safeguarding the Stocks: A Report on Analytical Projects to Support the Development of a Regional MCS Strategy for Pacific 
Oceanic Fisheries,” 2009, http://www.m2cms.com.au/uploaded/5/FFA%20MCS%20Final%20Synopsis%20Report.pdf.
4 
Elizabeth Babcock and Ellen Pikitch, “How Much Observer Coverage Is Enough to Adequately Estimate Bycatch.” Pew Institute 
of Ocean Science, 2003, http://www.pewtrusts.org/uploadedFiles/wwwpewtrustsorg/Reports/Protecting_ocean_life/oceana_
bycatch_110403.pdf
5 
FFA catch and value database. http://www.ffa.int/catch_value
6 
http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/wcpfc-tcc7-2011-b-01/pew-environment-group-review-fad-management-plans
7 
Report of the Twelfth Meeting of the International Scientific Committee for Tuna and Tuna-Like Species in the North Pacific Ocean, 
Plenary Session. 18-23 July 2012, Sapporo, Japan. 
8 
J. Rice and S. Harley,  “Stock Assessment of Oceanic Whitetip Sharks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean,” WCPFC-SC8-2012/
SA-WP-06, Rev. 1, 2012.
9 
J. Rice and S. Harley,  “Stock Assessment of Silky Sharks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean,” WCPFC SC8 2012/ SA WP 07. 
Rev. 1, 2012.
10 
Commission for the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, 
Scientific Committee, Eighth Regular Session, Busan, Korea, 7-15 August 2012, summary report, adopted version.  
11 
S. de Jong and C. Simpfendorfer, 2009,  “The Queensland Shark Control Program: A Fisheries-Independent Assessment of Shark 
Stocks in Far North Queensland., 8th Indo Pacific Fish Conference and 2009 Australian Society for Fish Biology Workshop and 
Conference, 31 May- 5 June 2009, Freemantle, Western Australia. 
12 
SPC OFP. Summary Information on Whale Shark and Cetacean Interactions in the Tropical WCPFC Purse Seine Fishery, Document 
WCPFC8 -2011-IP-01, Rev. 1, 18 January 2012. 
13 
SPC OFP. Summary information on Whale Shark and Cetacean Interactions in the Tropical WCPFC Purse Seine Fishery, Document 
WCPFC8 -2011-IP-01, Rev. 1, 18 January 2012. 
14 
P. Ward et al., “Large-Scale Experiment Shows That Nylon Leaders Reduce Shark Bycatch and Benefit Pelagic Longline Fishers,” 
Fisheries Research 90 (2008):100-108.
15 
A. Afonso,  R. Santiago, H. Hazin, Fabio H.V. Hazin, “Shark Bycatch and Mortality and Hook Bite-Offs in Pelagic Longlines: Interactions 
Between Hook Types and Leader Materials,” Fisheries Research 131–133 (2012): 9-14. 
16 
Ward, P., et al., op cit. 
17 
“Safeguarding the Stocks,” op cit. 
18 
UNGA Resolution 66/68, 28 March 2012, UN Doc. A/RES/66/68, para. 53.
19 
Report of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, Rio de Janeiro, 20-22 June 2012, outcome document “The 
future we want,” paras. 170-171, http://www.uncsd2012.org/content/documents/814UNCSD%20REPORT%20final%20revs.pdf.
20 
Recommendations From the Review of the WCPFC, Section 3.2.5.WCPFC-TCC8-2012/20, Rev. 1.
21 
Pew Environment Group, “Closing the Gap: Comparing Tuna RFMO Port State Measures With the FAO Agreement on Port State 
Measures,” June 2011,  http://www.pewenvironment.org/uploadedFiles/PEG/Publications/Report/Tuna_RFMO_Report_July2011.pdf. 
22 
WCPFC-TCC8-2012/DP13, http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/WCPFC-TCC8-2012-DP13/European-Union-Proposal-CMM-WCPFC-Scheme-
Minimum-Standards-Inspection-Port.
23 
The ACP FISH II Programme is a 4.5-year programme financed by the European Development Fund on behalf of ACP (African, 
Caribbean and Pacific Group of states) countries. The aim of the programme is to improve fisheries management in ACP countries 
so as to ensure that fisheries resources under the jurisdiction of these countries are exploited in a sustainable manner. http://www.
acpfish2-eu.org/
24 
IHS Fairplay http://www.ihs.com/products/maritime-information/ships/world-register.aspx 
25 
At the first joint meeting of the tuna RFMOs held in Kobe, Japan, in 2007, participants agreed to work toward the creation of a 
harmonized list of vessels “including use of a permanent unique identifier for each vessel such as an IMO number”, see Report of the 
Joint Meeting of Tuna RFMOs, 2007, p. 2; Appendix 14, Key areas and challenges (I), paragraph 7 and Technical work to cooperate 
across RFMOs (II), para. 2. As part of the Kobe process, at the first workshop on the Consolidated List of Authorized Vessels of Tuna 
Regional Fisheries Management Organizations (CLAV) in 2011, participants agreed that “the IMO number represents the best option 
to identify individual vessels”, Workshop on Exchange of Information and Maintenance of the Consolidated List of Authorized Vessels 
of Tuna Regional Fisheries Management Organizations. Rome, 7-9 February 2011, T-RFMO CLAV Technical Report No. 1, 2011, p. 
8, see also Second Workshop on Exchange of Information and Maintenance of the Consolidated List of Authorized Vessels of Tuna 
Regional Fisheries Management Organizations, Rome, 6-7 June 2012, T-RFMO CLAV Technical Report No. 2, 2012. 
26 
WCPFC’s Performance Review Report recommends the introduction of a Lloyd’s Fairplay Unique Vessel Identifier (UVI/IMO) for vessels 
of 24 meters or more in length. Supra note (ii), Section 6.1.5.
27 
This requirement is consistent with the conclusions and recommendations of the Technical Consultation to Identify a Structure and 
Strategy for the Development and Implementation of the Global Record of Fishing Vessels, Refrigerated Transport Vessels and 
Supply Vessels (Rome, 8-12 November 2010), FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Report No. 956,  6-7.
28 
Particularly, paragraph 6 (c) of the CMM, which enables any CCM to request the application of the WCPFC’s VMS to waters under its 
national jurisdiction.
POLICY 
STATEMENT
ContaCt: Pew Environment Group | international@pewtrusts.org 
For additional resources, visit us at www.PewEnvironment.org/ip.
Philadelphia, PA 19103 
Washington, D.C. 20004 
1050 Brussels, Belgium 
London WC1H BY, United Kingdom
Tel. +1 (215)575-9050 
Tel. +1 (202)552-2000 
Tel. +32 (0)2 2741620 
Tel. +44 (0)20 7388 5370 
ConnECt: 
Facebook http://www.facebook.com/PewEnvironmentGroup
Twitter @PewEnvironment
YouTube http://www.youtube.com/user/Pew
aBoUt tHE PEW EnVIRonMEnt GRoUP  
The Pew Environment Group is the conservation arm of The Pew Charitable Trusts, a non-governmental organization that works 
globally to establish pragmatic, science-based policies that protect our oceans, preserve our wildlands and promote clean energy.
Hammerhead shark, © Mark Doherty/Shutterstock.com
