1 
 
 
COMMISSION 
FOURTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Manila Philippines 
3 – 7 December 2017 
World Tuna Purse seine Organization Statement for WCPFC 14 
WCPFC14-2017-OP13 
04 December 2017 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by WTPO 
 
 
 
 
 
World Tuna Purse seine Organization 
 
WTPO Statement for WCPFC 14 
The World Tuna Purse Seine Organization (WTPO) reiterate its adherence to the further 
development of the tuna fishery by having better, efficient and sustainable solutions in the 
management of the tuna resources in all oceans.    
 
WTPO continues to follow, promote and support a no exemption on fishing capacity 
control in all areas. 
 
WTPO, again, requests the WCPFC to continue its review of the current WCPFC definition 
of Fish Aggregate Device (FAD).  We believe that the current WCPFC FAD definition is not 
comprehensive, thus resulting in confusion and misunderstanding between the observers 
on board and the fishing vessel operators. 
 
WTPO strongly recommends to adopt the IATTC definition of “Fish-Aggregating Device” 
(FAD) which means “anchored, drifting, floating or submerged objects deployed and/or 
tracked by vessels, including through the use of radio and/or satellite buoys, for the 
purpose of aggregating target tuna species for purse-seine fishing operations”. 
  
(https://www.iattc.org/PDFFiles2/Resolutions/C-16-01-FADs-Amendment-C-15-03.pd 
 
WTPO also support the current FFA/PNA Observer Program and look forward to  
strengthen their credibility through continuous improvement in the implementation of 
observer regulations and updating of new knowledge related to the said program, including  
the selection of qualified and competent FFA/PNA observers to make acceptable, fair and 
accurate reports while carrying out their tasks.  In addition, the WTPO supports the 
establishment of a mechanism for observer providers to give feedback in a timely manner.   
 
WTPO also proposes the creation of a WCPFC working group to work with vessel operators 
with the objective of establishing new and improved systems and mechanisms that 
addresses all stakeholder concerns. 
 
WTPO wishes to pursue the issues of transparency of the Vessel Day Scheme (VDS), such 
as standard definition and interpretation, claims rejection and calling for a more firm 
commitment from the PNA to provide timely solutions to the Non Fishing Days (NFD) 
claims. 
 
WTPO recognizes that the IFIMS system is considered as an efficient tool 
to be used by all stakeholders including all PNA members to effectively manage the Vessel 
Day Scheme (VDS) as the regional standard. 
 
Lastly, the WTPO is committed to the conservation and sustainable use of tuna resources 
and encourages WCPFC 14 to adopt scientifically based management measures 
successfully implemented in other RFMOs. 
 
WTPO Secretariat 
 
 
 
 
 
World Tuna Purse seine Organization 
 
 
 
