 
 
COMMISSION 
 EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION  
Tumon, Guam, USA 
26-30 March 2012 
GREENPEACE WCPFC BRIEFING PAPER 2012 
WCPFC8-2011-OP/05 
15 March 2012 
 
 
Paper prepared by Greenpeace 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
8th Regular Session  
of the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission 
March 2012, Guam, USA 
Summary 
The upcoming WCPFC annual meeting will review Conservation and Management Measure 2008-
01 (CMM-2008-01),  the “rescue plan” that was agreed in 2008 to safeguard the Pacific’s valuable 
tuna, and make decisions on how to strengthen this important conservation and management 
measure. It is clear that CMM-2008-01, which specifically focuses on addressing the overfishing of 
bigeye tuna and ensuring yellowfin tuna stocks are managed sustainably, is not going far enough to 
protect these precious marine resources. The measure was not ambitious enough to halt 
overfishing, and the many exemptions included in the measure have meant that it was practically 
impossible to achieve all of its objectives. 
Findings presented at the WCPFC Scientific Committee (SC) meeting last year highlighted that 
despite the success of a number of elements within the current measure, purse seine fishing effort 
has continued to increase. Bigeye and yellowfin tuna stocks are in decline in the region and have 
recently been assessed as Vulnerable and Near Threatened by the International Union for the 
Conservation of Nature (IUCN)1. While skipjack tuna stocks are not described as being overfished 
according to current management target reference points there are concerns that high and 
increasing catches are having a significant negative impact on stock size.  
The WCPFC now has an opportunity to be a global leader in tuna management by agreeing to take 
swift action to significantly strengthen this measure by following scientific advice to further cut 
fishing, by including additional high seas closures and banning the use of FADs in purse seine 
fisheries. By agreeing such measures the WCPFC will not only avoid the impending fisheries 
management disaster, but also meet the growing expectations of the market place in providing 
sustainable tuna. 
Greenpeace therefore urges that the following key elements be included in the outcomes of 
the WCPFC’s 8th regular session: 
- 
The permanent closure of the four high seas pockets to all fishing; 
- 
a total ban on the use of FADs with purse seine fishing; and 
- 
immediately implement a precautionary 50% cut in the fishing mortality for bigeye 
tuna including in long-line fisheries. 
                                                   
1 Collette BB, Carpenter KE, Polidoro BA, et al. (2011). High value and long life – Double jeopardy for tuna and billfishes. 
Science: 333: 291–2. Supporting online material 
at:http://www.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2011/07/06/science.1208730.DC1/1208730.Collette.SOM.Revision1.pdf 
2 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Summary ………………………………………………………………………………………1 
1.Tuna: Key Resource for Pacific Island’s Economies ……………………………….2 
2.Tuna Melt-down ...………………………………………………………………………….2 
 
Bigeye ………………………………………………………………………………....3 
 
Yellowfin ………………………………………………………………………………3 
 
Skipjack ……………………………………………………………………………….4 
 
Albacore ………………………………………………………………………………4 
3.Need for Greater Precaution: Set Reference and Limit Points …………………....4 
4.Cut Overcapacity …………………………………………………………………………..4 
5.High Seas Pocket Closures – Stop the Pirates and Protect the Ecosystem …….5 
 
Map: High Seas Pockets ……………………………………………………………6 
 
Ecological Benefits of Closures …………………………………………………..6 
6.Say No to FADs in Purse Seine Fisheries ……………………………………………..8 
7.Enhanced Enforcement: Key Role of NGOs …………………………………………..9 
8.Greenpeace’s Key Recommendations for WCPFC8 …………………………….…..10 
 
 
1. Tuna: Key Resource for Pacific Island’s Economies 
 
Tuna provides coastal states such as the Pacific Island countries, Philippines and Indonesia with 
much needed nourishment and a key source of economic activity. However, this vital resource is 
being fished into certain oblivion, primarily by countries outside the Pacific despite approximately 
80% of the rich tuna grounds being found in the EEZs of Pacific Island countries. Countries such as 
Korea, Taiwan, Japan, the US and the EU – spurred on by corporate lobbyists – are sending 
increasing numbers of fishing vessels in their many thousands to plunder these waters. To make 
matters worse, tuna fishing vessels from outside the Pacific are in some cases literally stealing tuna 
– stealing one of the only exploitable resources from countries that are among the smallest, poorest, 
least developed, and most vulnerable in the world. 
 
2. Tuna Melt-down 
Despite the adoption of CMM-2008-01, tuna catches in the Pacific have continued to increase, 
signaling its failure to meet fishing effort reduction objectives. The provisional catch of tuna for 2010 
was the 2nd highest annual reported catch (2,414,994 metric tonnes) for the Western and Central 
Pacific Ocean (WCPO), just 80,000 metric tonnes less than 2009’s record-breaking catch. This also 
represents almost 60% of the global tuna catch.2 These peaks are accompanied by the upward and 
record-setting trend of the purse seine fishery, with 2010 levels of purse seine fishing effort being 
significantly higher than in previous years. 
Bigeye: According to the WCPFC Scientific Committee, the bigeye tuna stock has been reduced to 
less than half of its levels prior to 1970 through overfishing and the increased harvest of juveniles, 
                                                   
2 See page 1. SC (2011). Executive Summary. Science Committee Seventh Regular Session, 9–17 August 2011, Pohnpei, Federated 
States of Micronesia, WCPFC..http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/executive-summary-provisional-sc7-summary-report 
3 
 
mainly from the use of FADs.3Not only is overfishing occurring but based on the average 
recruitment in recent years, scientists are concluding that the bigeye tuna stock is also likely to be 
overfished and the spawning biomass is as low as 23% of its potential spawning level.4 
The SC meeting recognised that it is currently too early to quantitatively conclude whether CMM-
2008-01 has reduced fishing mortality for bigeye tuna to the levels specified in the CMM. Incomplete 
and insufficient data for 2009 and 2010 has also meant that fisheries models for 2010 are still 
uncertain and inconclusive.5 However, part of the problem is due to the range of exemptions that 
undermine its success. Removal of these exemptions would remove about 50% of the estimated 
overfishing6.  
When reviewing CMM-2008-01 and agreeing an enhanced new measure (CMM-2012), the TCC 
agreed to use the existing measure and its elements as the starting point. SC7 did recommend 
additional measures to ensure further reductions in fishing mortality above those expected at the 
CMM-2008-01.7Greenpeace believes that many of the elements contained in the original CMM still 
apply and key elements should be retained, updated and strengthened. The current measure 
should remain in place unless the Commission agrees otherwise, or there is an explicit cessation 
date.  
Greenpeace recommends a 50% reduction in the catch rates of bigeye tuna from the recent 
average levels (2006-2009) to ensure that bigeye tuna stocks are given the best chance to recover 
to more precautionary levels. It is vital that the newly agreed measures are considerably more 
effective and ambitious than the current 30% reduction that is contained in the CMM-2008-01, in 
order to take into account poor catch reporting, lack of independent observer data from longliners, 
and uncertainties of the stock assessments. 
Yellowfin: The SC meeting concluded that WCPO yellowfin is not likely to be experiencing 
overfishing or in an overfished state according to current management objectives, although there 
are significant uncertainties involved in the assessments. Strong indications were provided, 
however, showing that this stock is in trouble.8 Exploitation rates were the highest in the western 
equatorial region, which accounts for more than three quarters of the total yellowfin catch, and 
spawning biomass is estimated to have declined to less than a third of its unexploited levels. Based 
on the Fmsy reference point currently used, one model showed that there is a possibility that 
overfishing is occurring. In addition, New Zealand, has reported a decline in catches, which may 
indicate range contraction as the stock declines in size. The high mortality rate of juvenile yellowfin, 
primarily due to purse seine FAD fisheries is of particular concern, with the SC concluding the 
                                                   
3 See paragraphs 10 and 18: SC (2011). Executive Summary. Science Committee Seventh Regular Session, 9–17 August 2011, 
Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia, WCPFC. .http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/executive-summary-provisional-sc7-summary-report 
See also paragraphs 141 of: SC 2011. Summary Report.http://www.wcpfc.int/node/3961 
4 See page 29, paragraph 141. SC (2011). Summary Report. Science Committee Seventh Regular Session, 9–17 August 2011, Pohnpei, 
Federated States of Micronesia, WCPFC. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/3961 
5See page 3, paragraphs 11–21. SC (2011). Executive Summary. Science Committee Seventh Regular Session, 9–17 August 2011, 
Phonpei, Federated States of Micronesia, WCPFC. http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/executive-summary-provisional-sc7-summary-report 
6See page 4, last paragraph: OFP-SPC 2011. WCPFC-TCC7-2011-31http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/wcpfc-tcc7-2011-31/projections-based-
2011-stock-assessments 
7SC 7 recommended that there should be a minimum of a 32% reduction in fishing mortality from the average levels for 2006–2009 to 
return the fishing mortality rate to FMSY. This is the equivalent to a minimum of a 39% reduction of the 2004 level in fishing mortality, and 
a 28% reduction of the average 2001–2004.See page 38, SC (2011). Summary Report. Science Committee Seventh Regular Session, 9–
17 August 2011, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia, WCPFC.http://www.wcpfc.int/node/3961 
8 Paragraph 25–31. SC (2011). Executive Summary. Science Committee Seventh Regular Session, 9–17 August 2011, Pohnpei, 
Federated States of Micronesia, WCPFC..http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/executive-summary-provisional-sc7-summary-
report.http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/executive-summary-provisional-sc7-summary-report 
4 
 
productivity of the stock would be significantly increased if juvenile catches were decreased.9These 
indicators, along with the uncertainty in stock assessments call for further reductions in yellowfin 
mortality to be included in the new CMM, particularly with regard to juvenile yellowfin. The 
importance of yellowfin fisheries to many coastal states underlines the urgent need for a 
precautionary approach in managing this stock.  
Skipjack: Skipjack catches in 2010 were the 2nd highest recorded. While the stock is not described 
as being overfished there are concerns that if recent fishing patterns continue, catch levels are likely 
to decline as stock levels are fished down to MSY levels. Additionally, high catches in the equatorial 
region could result in range contractions of the stock, thus reducing skipjack availability to higher 
latitudes – Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and Hawaii have already reported catch declines.10The 
precautionary approach must be applied in setting management targets to ensure these relatively 
abundant fish stocks and the economic viability of this fishery are not jeopardised. It is therefore 
important that the new measure is applicable to skipjack tuna. 
South Pacific Albacore: Finally, the albacore fishery also requires more protection and must also 
be covered by the CMM. While this stock is considered relatively healthy without limits placed on 
this fishery there is a danger that fishing effort will be transferred from the more regulated stocks to 
albacore. The fishery is particularly important to South Pacific nations, and increases in catches will 
result in catch rate declines and associated impacts on vessel profitability.11 
3. Need for Greater Precaution: Set Reference and Limit Points 
A precautionary and ecosystem-based approach to fisheries management urgently requires the 
rejection of unsustainable fishing practices such as FADs in purse seine fisheries and the use of 
area-based management tools such as well enforced marine reserves. Greenpeace strongly urges 
that a process is set swiftly into place to ensure that ecosystem-based precautionary limit reference 
points and precautionary target reference points for all stocks (as required by the UN Fish Stocks 
Agreement) must be set by the WCPFC, as well as management measures to ensure these targets 
are not exceeded, and necessary actions can be taken swiftly if these targets are surpassed. These 
reference points must take into account non-target/bycatch species and the ecosystem- with priority 
made for species that are listed as threatened or endangered and also including economic and 
social objectives.  
4. Cut Overcapacity 
Overcapacity is at the core of the ever-deepening unsustainable exploitation of the region’s tuna 
stocks. This needs to be reversed so the Pacific will not be robbed of its opportunity to reap large 
economic benefits from the tuna resource and lose its edge in marketing these products under 
better environmental credentials.  
The underlying issue to all these management challenges continues to be the fact that there is 
simply too much fishing capacity operating in the region chasing rapidly declining stocks, and 
strongly contributing to overfishing. A capacity reduction scheme which results in a significant 
                                                   
9 Paragraph 27 and 31: Executive Summary. Science Committee Seventh Regular Session, 9–17 August 2011, Pohnpei, Federated 
States of Micronesia, WCPFC..http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/executive-summary-provisional-sc7-summary-
report.http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/executive-summary-provisional-sc7-summary-report 
10 Paragraph 34 and 35. SC (2011). Executive Summary. Science Committee Seventh Regular Session, 9–17 August 2011, Pohnpei, 
Federated States of Micronesia, WCPFC. http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/executive-summary-provisional-sc7-summary-report 
11 Paragraphs 41–42. SC (2011). Executive Summary. Science Committee Seventh Regular Session, 9–17 August 2011, Pohnpei, 
Federated States of Micronesia, WCPFC. http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/executive-summary-provisional-sc7-summary-report 
5 
 
reduction of pressure on these stocks and improves the profitability of the fishery is urgently 
needed. Radically reducing fishing capacity and effort, starting with a target to reduce big eye catch 
rates by 50%, following environmental and social criteria, would not only ensure sustainability but 
also improve the economic performance of the fleets. 
In order to effectively eliminate overcapacity it is also essential to address the rights and needs of 
developing coastal states, in particular small island and least developed States. There also needs to 
be reliable information, robust systems to coordinate, harmonise and share information, as well as 
strong compliance and enforcement mechanism. Greenpeace welcomes the discussions amongst 
tuna RFMOs within the KOBE process to improve tuna fisheries management. We strongly urge the 
WCPFC to adopt the Kobe III recommendations on compliance and enforcement, including that 
developed fishing members freeze large-scale purse seine capacity under their flag, as a first (but 
still insufficient step), based on the status of the stocks the WCPFC should consider a scheme for:  
 
 “• Reduction of overcapacity in a way that does not constrain the access to, development of, 
and benefit from sustainable tuna fisheries, including on the high seas, by developing 
coastal States, in particular small island developing States, territories, and States with small 
and vulnerable economies; and   
• Transfer of capacity from developed fishing members to developing coastal fishing 
members within its area of competence where appropriate. “12 
5. High Seas Pocket Closures – Stop the Pirates and Protect the Ecosystem 
Currently the WCPFC agreed to close two of the four high seas pockets in the WCPO to purse 
seine tuna fishing in 2010 as part of CMM2008-01. However, Greenpeace does not believe that this 
alone will achieve full benefits as both legitimate and illegal fishing operations would simply transfer 
to the open pockets and increase effort in this region to make up for opportunities lost elsewhere. 
There is therefore a need to close the net on IUU fishing and to prevent fishing effort being 
redeployed in other areas by agreement by the WCPFC to close fishing in the two remaining 
eastern high seas pockets. To make sure the closures bring about desired conservation and 
management benefits a full closure to all gear types including long-lining is also needed to be 
included in the enhanced CMM. This is especially necessary given the continued practice of 
transshipments at sea by the region’s long-line vessels. Establishing fully protected marine reserves 
in the four high seas pockets is an effective tool for maintaining a healthy Pacific ecosystem and will 
yield both long-term economic and ecological benefits for the region. 
According to the SC, such fisheries closures may also have potential economic benefits to the 
countries surrounding these closed areas, as well as to the stock conservation benefits for tuna. 
However, this year’s SC meeting concluded that in order for these closures to be effective, 
especially in relation to bigeye tuna, fishing effort needs to be cut not simply displaced to other 
areas. Closures should be extended to more areas and include long-line fisheries as these have 
shown a beneficial effect on the bigeye population in conjunction with other measures outside of 
these areas.   
Additional measures were agreed last year in the eastern high seas pocket (pocket 3) Special 
Management Area, which surrounds French Polynesia, Kiribati and Cook Islands. This high seas 
area has long been a playground for IUU fishing vessels, seriously affecting the ability of these 
                                                   
12 KOBE III Recommendations Capacity and IUU Listing WCPFC8-2011-29 http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/wcpfc8-2011-29/kobe-iii-
recommendations-capacity-and-iuu-listing 
6 
 
surrounding countries to sustainably manage their shared fish stocks. This “entry-exit notification 
scheme” requests flag states to report the entry and exiting of their fishing vessels into the high 
seas pocket. Greenpeace believes that this measure should be implemented across the region to 
help enforce extended high seas closures to purse seine and long-line fishing. However, we do not 
believe that this type of measure should replace the need for complete area closures, because 
without full protection of these areas the benefits to the tuna stocks and ecosystem in general will 
be lost. 
In addition Greenpeace strongly supports the actions of the eight Pacific Island countries making up 
the Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA) 13- that last year announced the closure of the world´s 
largest area of high seas to purse seine fishing, covering 4.5 million square km of international 
waters. That’s an area larger than India, the world’s seventh biggest country. We fully support the 
proposal by the PNA to include these purse seine closures in the open high seas to be included in a 
new and enhanced conservation and management measure. 
 
 
Map 1: The highlighted areas 1, 2 and 3 and 4 are the high seas pockets. Pockets1 and 2 are closed to purse 
seine fishing from 2010 as per WCPFC decision in December 2008  
 
                                                   
13 The Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu 
7 
 
Ecological Benefits of Closures: A significant increase in bigeye spawning mass appears when 
high seas areas (pocket 3 & 4 and high seas area proposed under PNA agreement14) are closed to 
longlining in combination with closing off purse seine fishing and eliminating the effort from both 
pockets 3 & 4 and high seas areas as well as pockets 1 and 2. Therefore closing pockets 3 & 4 and 
the PNA proposed high seas area to longline fishing has a much greater beneficial effect than just 
purse seine closures, and the effects are widespread throughout the region. For example, part of a 
known bigeye spawning area that begins in the Eastern Pacific Ocean lies within pockets 3 &4 and 
the PNA proposed high seas area. Longliners target sexually mature adult fish, which is near the 
size of 50% mature female bigeye. The combination of high levels of juvenile bycatch in purse-
seining with catch of adult female bigeye by longliners is having a detrimental impact of the bigeye 
stock throughout its life history.15 
The closure of pockets 3 & 4 as well as the other high seas area would also be effective for 
managing these fisheries as the climate warms. In particular it would ameliorate the dramatic effect 
that the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is having on the distribution of tropical tunas. Warmer 
water that is preferred by skipjack tuna is being extended to the east during El Niño episodes. This 
is resulting in high purse seine catches of skipjack, and presumably high incidental catches of 
bigeye, in the central region. Closing all 4 pocketsand additional high seas area would ameliorate 
the effects of ENSO on the efficacy of the area closures as conservation measures, and mitigate 
long-term variability, by reducing catch of juveniles and protecting part of the spawning grounds 
whatever the ENSO phase. If future changes projected under IPCC scenarios are correct that more 
frequent El Niño events will occur, there will be a spatial shift of the core habitat of skipjack and 
bigeye tunas toward the central region.16 
The further potential benefits of the high seas closure to the fisheries management of the West and 
Central Pacific include: protection of spawning areas; potential increased yields through the export 
of larvae and spillover of fish; help compliance and the control of IUU fishing; provide insurance 
against fisheries collapse and the failure of other management measures, i.e. providing a form of 
bet hedging for coping with uncertainty and lack of knowledge in order to reduce overall risk. 
Much of the documentation of positive impacts of marine reserves on commercial fish species 
comes from studies relating to small area closures in coastal waters, often in reef areas, as most 
closures to date have been of this type.  These studies highlight that it takes a number of years for 
the reserves to yield positive effects, especially in terms of increased yields in adjacent waters17.A 
2009 global meta-analysis demonstrates that, globally, old reserves are more effective than young 
                                                   
14All high seas areas between 10N and 20S and 170E and 150W. 
15Page 6, paragraph 4: Sibert J, Senina I, Lehodey P (2011).Prospects for effective conservation of bigeye tuna stocks in the W estern 
Central Pacific Ocean.SC7-MI-WP-05.http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/sc7-mi-wp-05/prospects-effective-conservation-bigeye-tuna-stocks-
western-central-pacific-ocean 
16 Page 5–6: Sibert J, Senina I, Lehodey P (2011). Prospects for effective conservation of bigeye tuna stocks in the Western Central 
Pacific Ocean.SC7-MI-WP-05.http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/sc7-mi-wp-05/prospects-effective-conservation-bigeye-tuna-stocks-western-
central-pacific-ocean 
17The establishment of marine reserves in the Soufriere Marine Management Area of St Lucia and in Egypt’s Red Sea both led to 
increased yields in adjacent areas after 5 years
17. See Allsopp, M., Page, R., Johnston, P. and Santillo, D.  (2009). State of the 
Oceans.Pub. Springer ISBN: 978-1-4020 9115-5. One of the best documented cases of the positive effects of closing large areas to 
fisheries is the closure of the Georges Bank in the Gulf of Maine (USA) where three areas totaling 17,000 km
2 were closed to all forms of 
fishing that might impact groundfish.  Five years after the closures were implemented together with a package of measures that cut 
fishing effort, the closures were hailed as a success with positive effects on stocks of haddock, yellowtail, witch flounders and cod. See 
Gell, F.G. and Roberts, C.L. (2003) Benefits beyond boundaries: the fishery effects of marine reserves.  Trends in Ecology and Evolution 
volume 18, issue 9 pp.448-455. 
8 
 
reserves at increasing fish densities. The results imply that reserves should be maintained for up to 
15 years following establishment, even if they initially appear ineffective18. 
 As the actual establishment of marine reserves and marine protected areas, especially in the high 
seas and for highly migratory fish species is a relatively new endeavour, there are few data, but 
some models suggest positive benefits.  A recent modelling exercise demonstrates that fisheries 
benefits can be may be derived from reserves not just for overexploited stocks of low-mobility 
species, but also (to a lesser extent) for underexploited stocks and high-mobility species19i. The 
researchers also note that greatly increased resilience to overfishing is also found in the majority of 
cases. The authors conclude that a reserve provides benefits additional to those obtained from 
simple effort control. However, benefits from reserves depend to a major extent on the amount of 
effort redistribution following reserve establishment and on fishing selectivity; hence, these factors 
should be key components of any evaluation of reserve effectiveness. 
6. Say No to FADs in Purse Seine Fisheries 
The use of fish aggregating devices (FADs) in purse seine tuna fisheries has major consequences 
for the sustainability of tuna fisheries as they increase the efficiency of purse seiners in a way that is 
difficult to control and measure; they increase the catch of juvenile skipjack bigeye and yellowfin 
tunas; and they result in bycatch of non-target (and vulnerable) species such as sharks, turtles and 
other fish species.  
Of utmost concern is the shocking practice by some purse seine vessels that intentionally set their 
destructive nets on whales, dolphins and whale sharks – animals protected under numerous 
international agreements – in order to get to the prized tuna.  Often these animals are killed in the 
process. For example, in 2009, it was estimated that there were 1,323 toothed cetacean deaths and 
60 whale shark deaths due to encirclement by purse seine nets20.Greenpeace strongly supports the 
proposal by Australia for an urgent new CMM that specifically bans purse-seining on whale sharks 
and cetaceans and sets best practice guidelines for the release and reporting of these animals if 
accidentally caught. 
In 2008 the WCPFC adopted measures within its CMM that restricted the use of FADs. Evidence 
provided to the SC noted that while it was still early days to fully assess the impact of the FAD 
closure, trends are encouraging. As was illustrated again in 2010, the three-month ban on the use 
of FADs was found to be effective in significantly reducing the catch of bigeye tuna compared to the 
other months of the year. Overall, total catch was below average during the FAD ban period in 2009 
and 2010. Purse seine catch of bigeye tuna was significantly reduced21 during these closure periods 
compared to other months of those years.  
However, total purse seine effort increased between 2008 to 2010 with 2009 being a near record 
high for associated school effort in spite of the two month FAD closure. It is clear from the 
                                                   
18Molloy, P.P., McLean, I.B. and Cote, I.M. (2009)  Effects of marine reserves on fish populations: a global meta-analysis.  Journal of 
Applied Ecology 2009, 46, 743-751 
19P Apostolaki, P., Milner-Gulland, E.J., McAllister, M.K. and Kirkwood,G.P. (2011).Modeling the Effects of Establishing a Marine Reserve 
for Mobile Fish Species  Canadian Journal of Fisheries and aquatic Sciences published on the web 12 April 2011 
http://www.nrcresearchpress.com/doi/abs/10.1139/f02-018 
20 “Impact of Purse Seine Fishing Activity on Whale Sharks and Cetaceans”, Paper prepared by  Australia,                                                
WCPFC-TCC7-2011-DP/01, http://www.wcpfc.int/system/files/documents/meetings/technical-and-compliance-
ommittee/7th-regular-session/delegation-papers/WCPFC-TCC7-2011-DP-
01%20Whale%20Sharks%20and%20Cetaceans.pdf 
21Paragraph 338: SC (2011). Summary Report. Science Committee Seventh Regular Session, 9–17 August 2011, Pohnpei, Federated 
States of Micronesia, WCPFC. http://www.wcpfc.int/node/3961 
9 
 
preliminary results that FAD bans are effective for the time that they are in effect. However, if purse 
seine effort is increasing outside the three-month FAD closure, and exemptions still exist to the 
CMM, any benefits accrued during the ban period are being offset in the rest of the months, 
therefore rendering the short ban ineffective. It is also difficult to get a full picture due to lack of 
relevant data, as data was presented for the area 20N and 20S only, and did not include the purse 
seine catches outside this area, nor did it include catches from the Indonesian and Philippine fleets 
where catch of juvenile tuna is known to be particularly high.   
Given the scientific recommendation for bigeye mortality reduction is a 39% reduction on 2004 
levels,22 it is clear that the WCPFC urgently needs to extend the FAD ban measure as an effective 
means of reducing the fishing mortality of bigeye, and to allow the recovery of the stock to 
precautionary levels. The SC made the conclusion that “Limitation of FADs use would have a 
strong positive impact on bigeye stock conservation.” 
Greenpeace believes that the use of all objects that are deployed artificially as FADs or fishing on 
non-intentional FADs by purse seine fisheries should be banned globally by all the tuna RFMOs. A 
total FAD ban in purse seine fisheries within the WCPO would clearly be the best means of reducing 
the bigeye purse seine catch as well as bycatch of threatened and endangered marine life such as 
sharks and to some extent turtles that are known to be attracted to FADs and get caught up in purse 
seine nets. Overall the fishery is better off without FADs as: “the projections predict that total catch 
is quite stable (and in fact increases slightly) for increasing duration of FAD closure. This is because 
of the higher yield per recruit that is achieved for all species resulting from the larger average size of 
tuna taken in unassociated sets compared to FAD sets” 23 In addition recent studies demonstrate an 
overall economic benefit of reducing FAD use24. 
7. Enhanced Enforcement: Key Role of NGOs 
Greenpeace commends efforts by the Commission to establish an enhanced compliance monitoring 
scheme (CMS) to ensure compliance with CMMs. At WCPF7 a proposal put forward by Australia 
included the participation of NGOs in such a measure to provide information to the Commission on 
non-compliance by CCMs. The Commission Chair, reflecting on experience from various 
committees and governance bodies, suggested that the benefits of allowing interested parties to 
make information available outweighed the drawbacks, citing the effectiveness of this approach in 
development of the UN Fish Stocks Agreement. The Commission asked Australia to continue to 
work inter-sessionally to identify a range of possible responses to non-compliance (as provided in 
Para 23 of CMM 2010-03) and report to TCC7.  
Allowing NGOs to supply information for compliance purposes, given the lack of surveillance 
capacity in the region, would add to the Commission’s efforts of ensuring compliance with CMMs. 
Such practice is already formalised in other tuna RFMOs such as ICCAT. Observers, in particular 
environmental NGOs, are playing an increasingly participatory role in the Commission’s monitoring, 
control and surveillance responsibilities, particularly with regards to maritime surveillance of both the 
high seas managed areas and national waters. A formal process for the submission and 
                                                   
22SC 7 recommended that there should be a minimum of a 32% reduction in fishing mortality from the average levels for 2006–2009 to 
return the fishing mortality rate to FMSY. This is the equivalent to a minimum of a 39% reduction of the 2004 level in fishing mortality, and 
a 28% reduction of the average 2001–2004.See page 38, SC (2011). Summary Report. Science Committee Seventh Regular Session, 9–
17 August 2011, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia, WCPFC.http://www.wcpfc.int/node/3961 
23 Page 3–4, last paragraph: OFP-SPC (2011). Projections based on the 2011 stock assessments 
WCPFC-TCC7-2011-31 http://www.wcpfc.int/doc/wcpfc-tcc7-2011-31/projections-based-2011-stock-assessments 
24 Bailey M,U, Sumaila R, Martel S (2011).Can cooperative management of tuna fisheries in the Pacific  solve the growth 
overfishing problem. Fisheries center, University of British Columbia working paper 2011#1 
10 
 
consideration of such information has substantial benefits for the effective operation of the 
Commission, and would help achieve the objectives of the WCPFC Convention. 
Recalling the advice and recommendation of the WCPFC Chair at WCPFC7 in highlighting the 
benefits of NGO participation in a compliance monitoring scheme, Greenpeace calls on the WCPFC 
to ensure that a formal process is agreed allowing NGOs to participate in the work of the 
Commission, including, but not limited to, the submission of information on non-compliance with 
CMMs as part of an enhanced Compliance Monitoring Scheme (CMS). 
8. Greenpeace’s Key Recommendations for WCPFC8 
Greenpeace urges governments attending the WCPFC 8 to support measures that will have a 
beneficial impact on its valuable tuna species, rich marine life and livelihoods of Pacific Island 
Nations. Short-term and unsustainable economic interests must not be defended at the cost of long-
term sustainability – not only ecologically but also economically. In summary we urge action on the 
following issues:  
 
Extend the current high seas pocket closures to include all types of fishing. 
 
Adopt and implement the closure of the additional 2 high seas pockets further east to all 
fishing in order to strengthen the benefits derived from the existing high seas pockets 
closures and to prevent any transfer of high seas effort, in particular IUU fishing effort, from 
the closed pockets into new areas. 
 
Support the PNA proposal for the closure of the open high seas area to purse-seine fishing; 
 
Support the immediate ban of purse-seine fishing on cetaceans and whale sharks. 
 
Adopt and implement a complete year-round ban on the use of FADs in association with 
purse seine fishing. 
 
Reduce fishing mortality of bigeye by 50%. 
 
Agree further precautionary reductions in yellowfin catch. 
 
Support the inclusion of skipjack tuna in future measures to ensure an ecosystem-based 
approach to the management of tuna resources within well- defined precautionary limits. 
Apply the measure to the area 20 N and 20 S (to take into account skipjack management). 
 
Support the Kobe III recommendations for the WCPFC to put in place a scheme to reduce 
overcapacity. 
 
Ensure a process goes forward to set precautionary limits and reference points. 
 
Agree a process that allows greater involve of NGOs in MCS activities, including allowing 
NGOs to submit information on non-compliance with CMMs.  
 
                                                   
 
