 
 
COMMISSION 
THIRTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
Denarau Island, Fiji 
5 – 9 December, 2016 
WWF POSITION STATEMENT  
WCPFC13-2016-OP03 
9 November 2016 
 
 
Paper by The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) 
13th Regular Session of the Western Central Pacific Fisheries 
Commission (WCPFC13): Nadi, Fiji – December 5-9, 2016 
 
The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) would like to again thank the Western and Central Pacific 
Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) for the opportunity to attend the 13th Regular Session as an observer 
and to address the critically important role that it plays in the proper management of the (Western 
Central Pacific Ocean) WCPO fisheries.  
WWF once again calls on members of the WCPFC to address the issues and recommendations raised 
at SC12, TCC12, and WCPFC12 as well as observe the experience of other RFMOs in their own efforts 
to achieve and maintain improved measures for monitoring and surveillance.  WWF would like to note 
that this Position Statement is not comprehensive, but that fact does not mean that WWF does not 
think that other issues not included herein are not important.  WWF wishes to reiterate its position 
offered in Bali, Indonesia, in December 2015 (WCPFC12) and, taking into account the WCPFC-related 
meetings held since, the recommendations listed below as well as other documents submitted to the 
WCPFC for review as Observer Papers. 
WWF remains supportive of the work of the WCPFC and subsidiary bodies in pursuing the 
implementation of a Harvest Strategy (HS) approach as agreed under CMM 2014-06 Conservation 
and Management Measures to develop and implement a harvest strategy approach for key fisheries 
and stocks in the WCPO1 and Supplementary Information on Workplan for the adoption of Harvest 
Strategies under CMM 2014-06 (the “Workplan”).2  Consistent with previous WWF position 
statements and recommendations, WWF continues to encourage WCPFC13 to further endorse and 
support the adoption of explicit Limit and Target Reference Points (LRP/TRP), HCRs, and HSs for all 
© Gregg Yan/ WWF 
 
 
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 13th Regular Session, Nadi, Fiji, 5-9 December 2016 
2 
fishery stocks under WCPFC authority.  To that end, WWF strongly encourages WCPFC13 to meet or 
exceed the deadlines proposed for specific measures under the Workplan. 
WWF commends the adoption of a conservative bioeconomic TRP for skipjack at WCPFC12. 
Consistent with the precedent demonstrated by setting a bioeconomic TRP for skipjack, WWF 
encourages the adoption of a similar conservative bioeconomic TRP for South Pacific albacore in 
accordance with the recommendation and supporting analysis provided by the Pacific Islands Forum 
Fisheries Agency (FFA).  WWF also strongly supports further consideration and development of a 
well-defined HCR for the PNA skipjack fishery that ensures absolute compatibility throughout the 
entirety of the WCPFC CA and avoids a disproportionate burden on the Small Island Developing 
States (SIDS).  WWF notes the continuing strong support for these important management measures, 
specifically the adoption of TRPs and HCRs for the key target species.   
WWF recommends that the WCPFC: 
 
Support and endorse further implementation of CMM 2014-06 on Establishing a 
Harvest Strategy for Key Tuna Species in the WCPO consistent with proposed 
timelines including; 
o Record the Management Objectives for all stocks under the Workplan; 
o Agree acceptable levels of risk for all stocks under the Workplan; 
o Agree to timelines to rebuild the bigeye tuna (BET) stock to the LRP; 
o Agree to a monitoring strategy to assess performance against reference 
points for SP Albacore (SP ALB) and skipjack (SKJ); 
o Endorse further HCR development and implementation for the SKJ PS 
fishery; and 
o Endorse the FFA TRP proposal for the SP ALB LL fishery; 
 
Support the continued development and implementation of LRPs and TRPs as a 
priority for proper management of all stocks, including sharks; and 
 
Support development and implementation of interim precautionary TRPs for 
BET and YFT. 
Many shark species in the WCPO remain subject to high levels of fishing mortality that current stock 
assessment trends suggest could be unsustainable.3  Sharks play a critical role in the WCPO marine 
ecosystem as apex predators and indicators of ecosystem health.4  WWF is concerned with shark 
conservation and sustainability in the WCPFC region as a whole and considers responsible 
management, trade, and consumption where shark mortality occurs in all fishing activities, not just in 
circumstances where tuna fishing is occurring.  Therefore, WCPFC must also recognise the needs of 
coastal States in the WCPFC region to manage their shark populations. 
Although WWF supports the previous minor action taken by the WCPFC in CMM 2014-05 
Conservation and Management Measure for Sharks5, WWF continues to support recommendations 
made previously by the SC and drawn from the discussion regarding a proposed comprehensive and 
integrated shark CMM.6  By way of reference, we again endorse the recommendations contained in 
sections 4.1 and 4.2 of the paper previously presented by Dr. Shelley Clarke in addition to measures 
recommended below.7 
Furthermore, WWF endorses the recent action taken by the Inter-American Tropical Tuna 
Commission (IATTC) to support best practices for safe handling and release manta rays (genus 
Mobula and Manta) aboard purse seiners.  WWF encourages the WCPFC to pursue equivalent or 
consistent measures for mobula and manta rays in the WCPFC. 
 
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 13th Regular Session, Nadi, Fiji, 5-9 December 2016 
 
 
3 
Reports from the WCPFC Technical and Compliance Committee (TCC12) indicated that finning is still 
rife within WCPO waters, with many CCMs failing to comply with existing shark CMMs. It is 
imperative that action is taken to end the wasteful practice of shark finning and associated lack of 
accounting of shark mortality that results. 
In October this year, silky sharks, three species of thresher sharks and all nine species of mobula rays 
were included within Appendix II of CITES, which places a greater emphasis on RFMOs to ensure 
catches are reported accurately to meet CITES reporting obligations. 
WWF recommends the WCPFC: 
 
Develop, endorse, and recommend adoption of a Comprehensive Shark CMM 
that includes efforts to: 
o Mandate bycatch best practices consistent with those found in the 
Compendium of Best Practice of Conservation and Management 
Measures (CMMs) for the of Species Bycatch in Tuna RFMOs; 
o Implement the recommendations for bycatch that were endorsed at Kobe 
III and adopt an annually updated report card system against these 
recommendations for all of the WCPFC fisheries; 
o Require, through data collected from observer programs and other 
means, estimation of the number of captures and releases of all sharks 
and rays, including the status upon release (dead or alive), and reporting 
of this information to the WCPFC;  
o Review and amend CMM 2014-05 to prohibit vessels carrying wire trace 
and the use branch lines; and 
o Require, through observer programs, recording what gear is used in 
longline activities including the use of wire traces and any multi- 
monofilament traces in order to avoid bite-off by sharks; 
 
Provide definitions for mobula and manta rays to be considered as a key shark 
species; 
 
Encourage the development of reference points and management for non-target 
species, including all shark and ray species, as envisaged under Articles 5 and 10 
of the WCPF Convention;  
 
CCMs fully support proposals to land sharks with fins naturally attached as the 
only way to ensure shark finning does not occur ; and 
 
Encourage CCM’s to report all shark and ray catches from domestic fleets 
operating in territorial and archipelagic waters to assist CCMs to meet 
obligations for shark and ray species incorporated under CITES Appendix II. 
Information collected as part of an appropriate observer programme is critically important to the 
proper management of a fishery.  Data collected by observers plays a central role in informing 
fisheries scientists on everything ranging from stock assessments to non-target species impacts.  
Furthermore, observers play an indispensable role in monitoring and enforcing very important CMMs 
in the WCPO.  Indeed, observers represent the vanguard of fisheries management through the science 
and service that they provide.  Consequently, observer safety and security as well as appropriate 
observer coverage must be considered a top priority along with greater support for relevant 
authorities to see that the capacity of the ROP is strengthened. 
 
 
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 13th Regular Session, Nadi, Fiji, 5-9 December 2016 
4 
WWF commends the WCPFC’s swift and decisive action to lead the world in addressing issues with 
observer safety and security through the adoption of several key provisions at WCPFC12.  WWF 
supports further efforts to ensure observer safety and security through the full and transparent 
documentation and catalogue of observer incidents.  One of the outstanding gaps in observer safety 
and security is represented by the lack of information available to address observer incidents through 
proper followup and documentation that will allow for identification of repeat offenders or potentially 
dangerous situations for future observers.  Thus, WWF recommends establishing an immediate and 
transparent reporting procedure for observers to report instances of threats, harrassment, 
intimidation, or assault that national programmes and the ROP could then use to determine future 
observer placement.  This procedure must include an annual, publicly available, consolidated, 
detailed, and fully transparent report of all infractions against observers. 
WWF also welcomes the proposal on flag state responsibilities in the event of alleged observer safety 
concern offered by the United States, which was discussed at length in the TCC12 in both working 
group and plenary sessions.  This proposal helps ensure that flag and coastal states fully understand 
their roles and responsibilities in the event of an observer safety and security concern. 
WWF notes that observer coverage on longline vessels operating in the WCPO, regardless of the 
metrics used to calculate it, remains substantially less than 5% region-wide.  Moreover, WWF wishes 
to emphasise that the 5% observer coverage value identified by the WCPFC represents an arbitrary 
benchmark that was never intended to represent an “end goal,” but rather a minimum starting point 
toward appropriate observer coverage.  Even a consistently applied level of 5% coverage is statistically 
and practically useless for most management or monitoring, control, and surveillance (MCS) 
purposes.  Therefore, WWF supports efforts to improve the observer coverage of all longline fisheries 
in the WCPO.  As such, WWF supports calculating observer coverage according to the proposed 
hierarchy of four metrics for assessing observer coverage, but notes that best practice would be to use 
“number of hooks deployed” as an appropriate metric.  If other metrics for calculating coverage are 
used, terms must be very clearly defined in advance and each metric must be calculated in a way to be 
comparable to the other metrics. 
WWF also notes that different levels of observer coverage may be required for management or 
compliance purposes, depending on specific identified objectives, and recommends that appropriate 
analyses be conducted to determine each of those levels respectively in the context of identified 
objectives. Overall, the level of observer coverage on longline vessels must be increased immediately 
and substantially greater than 5% to achieve any meaningful management and compliance objectives.8 
Transhipment remains one of the most prominent weaknesses in catch documentation and 
verification that leads to Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated (IUU) catch in the WCPO.  WWF notes 
that the most simple, efficient, and effective solution to the challenges of transhipment-related IUU is 
to simply prohibit all at-sea transhipment and require all fishing vessels to land their catch at the 
nearest available designated port in the WCPO following the conclusion of fishing activity.  However, 
acknowledging that a prohibition on transhipment is politically unlikely at this point, WWF supports 
an unequivocal 100% observer monitoring requirement for all transhipments, in all WCPFC CA 
waters, subject to strong sanctions for non-compliance. 
WWF also recommends that transhipment requirements be buttressed by verification and validation 
of transhipment activities through redundant systems including a vessel monitoring system (VMS) 
supplemented by an operating automated identification system (AIS).  If through investigation of 
suspected unreported transhipment activity indicated by VMS and corroborated by AIS, it is 
determined that transhipment activity was conducted in violation of transhipment rules, the offending 
 
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 13th Regular Session, Nadi, Fiji, 5-9 December 2016 
 
 
5 
vessel(s) should be subject to sanctions including license revocation and listing on the IUU vessel 
blacklist. 
WWF recommends the WCPFC: 
 
Endorse further observer safety and security measures, including fully 
transparent documentation and catalogue of observer incidents and persons 
involved; 
 
Endorse an analysis of levels of observer coverage required to achieve 
management or compliance purposes while ensuring that the metrics and 
methodologies used support development of appropriate comparative analyses 
that meet the needs of the Scientific Services Provider and any MCS objectives; 
 
Adopt the proposal for flag state requirements for observer safety and security; 
 
Support or endorse the use of VMS and AIS to verify and validate 100% observer 
coverage on all transhipments as well as supporting strong penalties and 
sanctions for violations; and 
Notwithstanding deficiencies in observer coverage, WWF views the issue of provision of historic and 
current operational data as critically important for the proper management of WCPFC stocks.  Thus, 
WWF encourages the WCPFC to review the legal analysis presented at WCPFC12 on the Provision of 
Operational Data by Japan and Korea.  This analysis has since undergone peer review in a prominent 
legal journal and is available as WCPFC12-2015-OP14 on the Commission website.  The conclusions of 
this analysis very clearly indicate that there is no domestic legal constraint for the provision of 
operational data for either Japan or Korea.  Therefore, Japan and Korea are obligated to provide both 
historic and current operational data to the WCPFC consistent with several prior agreed CMMs dating 
back to 2005. 
WWF recommends the WCPFC: 
 
Review the conclusions of WCPFC12-2015-OP14; and 
 
Request the submission of all current and historic operational data by Japan and 
Korea. 
Technical reports of all scientific and management bodies responsible for management of the Pacific 
bluefin tuna stock, including the International Scientific Committee for Tuna and Tuna-like Species in 
the North Pacific Ocean (ISC) and the IATTC, indicate that the Pacific Bluefin tuna stock remains in 
extremely poor condition.  The ISC confirmed that overfishing continues, even though the stock is 
heavily overfished, and its spawning stock biomass has declined to as low as 2.6% of its unfished 
level.9 This is a clear indicator that the stock is no longer in the status to support industrial fisheries 
and the management measures taken both in the Western and Central Pacific and in the Eastern 
Pacific have proven insufficient to conserve the biological integrity of this stock in timely manner. The 
IATTC and WCPFC must take immediate actions and assume their share of responsibility. 
The latest assessment conducted by ISC confirms that the stock is highly depleted, that fishing 
mortality exceeds all reasonable proxies for Fmsy. Without the robust and precautionary long-term 
rebuilding target, the recovery of the stock may be further delayed if the current scenario of low 
recruitment continues which is heavily reliant on a major adult cohort in the population. While the 
WCPFC adopted conservation measures calling for reductions in catch for Pacific bluefin tuna of <30 
kg in size, the stock requires conservation of all size classes of Pacific bluefin tuna, in particular the 
 
 
WWF Position Statement to the WCPFC – 13th Regular Session, Nadi, Fiji, 5-9 December 2016 
6 
spawning stocks.  Thus, WWF supports raising the minimum size restriction to <85kg based on the 
best available scientific information and consideration of the precautionary principle. 
WWF maintains deep concerns regarding this stock with an aim of restoring and rebuilding this 
ecologically, sociologically, and economically important fishery resource.  The current science strongly 
indicates that there is only one reproductive cohort that is reaching the end of its life.  Thus, the 
continued reproductive success of the entire stock depends on the reproductive success of a single 
cohort, leaving the stock in a critical situation that may seriously jeopardize recruitment.  
WWF encourages close monitoring of fisheries and catch as well as completion of a revised stock 
assessment for Pacific bluefin in 2016.  WWF urges both IATTC and WCPFC to adopt a long-term 
Pacific bluefin tuna recovery plan targeting at least 20%SSB0, and harvest control rules that are well-
defined, pre-agreed, and contain mandatory actions for a determined course of management action in 
response to changes in indicators of stock status with respect to reference points.  
The WCPFC, consistent with the best scientific information and consistent with its charge under the 
Convention to manage this stock, must recommend that fishing mortality on Pacific bluefin tuna be 
urgently and substantially reduced in both juveniles and adults in order to reduce the risk of 
recruitment collapse and allow spawning stock to rebuild. If sufficient management measures cannot 
be agreed in 2016, the WCPFC must recommend a moratorium on all harvest of Pacific bluefin until 
such measures are agreed. 
WWF recommends that the WCPFC: 
 
Agree to a precautionary Limit and Target Reference Point for Pacific bluefin 
tuna; 
 
Recommend a long-term Pacific bluefin tuna recovery plan targeting at least 
20%SSB0 by 2030; 
 
Expand the target size of juvenile Pacific bluefin tuna conservation measures 
from the current under 30kg requirement to under 85kg;  
 
Establish a Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS) for the thorough monitoring of 
Pacific bluefin tuna; and 
 In the absence of agreement on management measures at WCPFC13, recommend 
a moratorium on all harvest of Pacific bluefin until such time as those measures 
are agreed. 
                                                 
1 WCPFC (2014) Summary Report of the Eleventh Regular Session of the Western Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (Adopted version) 
– 29 July 2015, WCPFC, Apia, Samoa, 1-5 December 2014. CMM 2014-06 Conservation and Management Measures to develop and 
implement a harvest strategy approach for key fisheries and stocks in the WCPO. 
2 WCPFC (2015) Summary Report of the Twelfth Regular Session of the Western Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (Adopted version) 
– 6 July 2016, WCPFC, Bali, Indonesia, 3-8 December 2015. Attachment Y. p.271. 
3 Clarke, Shelley C., et al. (2013). Population Trends in Pacific Oceanic Sharks and the Utility of Regulations on Shark Finning. 
Conservation Biology, Volume 27, Issue , pages 197–209, February. 
4 See Stevenson, C., et al. (2007). High apex predator biomass on remote Pacific islands. Coral Reefs 26: 47-51;  See also Friedlander, A.M. 
and DeMartini, E.E. (2002). Contrasts on density, size, and biomass of reef fishes between the northwestern and the main Hawaiian islands: 
the effects of fishing down apex predators. Marine Ecology Progress Series 230: 253-264. 
5 WCPFC (2014) Summary Report of the Eleventh Regular Session of the Western Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (Adopted version) 
– 29 July 2015, WCPFC, Apia, Samoa, 1-5 December 2014. Attachment S. p.262. 
6 Clarke, Shelley C. (2013). Towards an Integrated Shark Conservation and Management Measure for the Western and Central Pacific 
Ocean. WCPFC-SC9-2013/ EB-WP-08. WCPFC-SC, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia, 6-14 August 2013. 
7 Id at 24-27. 
8 See e.g. Elizabeth Babcock, et al. (2011), How Much Observer Coverage is Enough to Adequately Estimate Bycatch?. Retrievable at 
http://www-aws.pewtrusts.org/~/media/legacy/uploadedfiles/wwwpewtrustsorg/reports/protecting_ocean_life/oceanabycatch110403pdf.pdf. 
9 Yukio Takeuchi, et al., 2014, Updated future projections of Pacific bluefin tuna with draft results to answer the requests from 
NC9.ISC/14/PBFWG-1/10re. 
●
 
© 1986 Panda Symbol WWF - World Wide Fund For Nature (Formerly World Wildlife Fund) 
® “WWF” is a WWF Registered Trademark. 
 
 
For more information  
 
Alfred “Bubba” Cook 
WCP Tuna Program Manager 
acook@wwf.panda.org 
Tel: +64 (0)27 833 0537 
  
 
 
WWF-New Zealand 
PO Box 6237, Marion Square                                          
Wellington 6141, New Zealand  
Tel. +64 (0) 4 499 2930 
 
 
 
 
