1
TWELFTH REGULAR SESSION
Bali, Indonesia
3-8 December 2015
Greenpeace Position Statement for WCPFC12
WCPFC12-2015-OP16
3 December 1145
 
1 
 
Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission 
Twelfth Regular Session of the Commission (WCPFC12) 
Bali, Indonesia, 3–8 December 2015 
 
Greenpeace welcomes the opportunity to attend the 12th meeting of the Western and Central 
Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) as an observer. The outcome of the recent WCPFC 
Science Committee meeting, in particular the overfishing occurring on the bigeye, Pacific bluefin 
stocks and decline in southern albacore, is the predictable result of the failure of members of this 
Commission to uphold the mandate stipulated under Articles 5 and 6 of the Convention to apply the 
precautionary approach, including through acting upon the best available scientific advice, in adopting 
conservation and management measures (CMMs) for key tuna species. 
 
The continued decline in these stocks is a result of continued expansion of fishing fleets, increasing 
fishing capacity and effort, through the use of FADs in particular, and increasing non-compliance.   
Two of the Pacific’s vital tuna stocks are now at dangerously low levels: the Pacific bluefin tuna 
population is estimated to be at 4.3% and bigeye tuna at 16% of its original spawning biomass 
. 
The Commission must prioritise efforts towards rebuilding these stocks and putting in place all the 
necessary management frameworks and control mechanisms to safeguard them from further decline. 
The Commission must develop precautionary targets and harvest control rules to restore all the 
fisheries to full health and productivity.  
 
Greenpeace therefore calls on the members of the WCPFC to urgently adopt the following measures: 
 
1. Agree a new recovery plan for bigeye tuna that brings existing fishing capacity and effort 
into line with precautionary mortality limits to end overfishing and allow for the quickest 
possible recovery of the stock. Greenpeace believes that in order to achieve such objectives a 
full ban on the use of FADs, a reduction in longline effort, and the closure of the high seas 
pockets to all tuna fishing is required; 
 
2. Adopt a Conservation and Management Measure for South Pacific albacore that sets the 
basis for reducing capacity in the fishery and puts catches in line with precautionary 
mortality levels. Greenpeace believes such measures must ensure that both fishing capacity 
and catches are brought down to biologically and economically sustainable levels. Greenpeace 
recommends that in agreeing the necessary reduction in total catches in the albacore fishery, 
priority should be given to reducing fishing opportunities available to CCMs that are not 
complying with data provision requirements. 
 
3. Adopt a full ban on at sea transhipment. Transshipment at sea is a tool that facilitates IUU 
fishing activity as has been documented by Greenpeace in the Pacific tuna fishing grounds 
from 2006 - 20151 ship expeditions. At-sea transshipment is already banned for purse seine 
fleets, and Pacific Island countries have made progress to shut down this sketchy practice in 
longline fleets. Most recently, the government of Nauru announced a ban on transshipment in 
its waters in September 2015 after the Greenpeace bust of Shuen De Ching No. 8882, a 
                                                           
1 Expedition reports available upon request from Greenpeace 
2 http://grnpc.org/Shuen-De-Ching-No-888-shark-evidence 
For further information:  
Lagi Toribau 
 
                      Mark Dia 
 
 
 
 
Head of Delegation 
                      Regional Oceans Campaign Coordinator  
 
 
 
 
Lagi.Toribau@greenpeace.org            Mark.Dia@greenpeace.org 
 
Taiwanese longliner engaged in illegal fishing, shark finning3 and transshipment on the high 
seas. Transshipment and the use of motherships to resupply fishing vessels at sea also 
facilitates forced labour and human rights abuse at sea, by allowing fishing vessels to stay at 
sea for months and even years, making escape impossible for fishing crews. It also 
exacerbates the extremely low level of observer coverage on longline vessels by making 
observer trips difficult to implement and allowing longline vessels to avoid port inspection from 
landing catches in port or transshipping in authorised transshipment ports where inspection is 
possible. The impacts of transshipment at sea are clear, and as a result tuna traders and 
consumers cannot be sure that their longline tuna is caught legally and without the use of 
forced labour. The commission must live up to its obligation to adopt compatible measures for 
the high seas, and follow Pacific Islands and Indonesia's lead in EEZ transshipment bans by 
adopting a ban on transshipment at sea across the full convention area. 
 
4. Adopt a moratorium on targeted fishing for Pacific bluefin tuna. Given the dire state of the 
Pacific bluefin tuna population it is a matter of urgency that the Commission agrees to a 
moratorium on all targeted fishing for Pacific bluefin tuna until such time that a Pacific-wide 
management plan is agreed and implemented, and the stock has shown conclusive evidence 
of recovery to levels above an agreed biomass limit reference point. 
 
5. Adopt interim target reference points (TRPs) of 50% SB for skipjack, bigeye and 
yellowfin, and 45% for albacore until final TRPs are agreed by the Commission by 2017.  
 
6. Strengthening the current shark finning measure (CMM 2014-05) to prohibit both 
methods of shark targeting (wire leaders and shark lines beneath buoys). The use of 
shark lines is difficult to verify unless vessels are witnessed retrieving the lines from beneath 
buoys, so vessels may be violating this measure without detection.  
 
7. Strengthen CMM 2010-07 to require sharks be retained with their fins naturally attached. 
This is international best practise as set out in the UN General Assembly resolution 62/177. 
Enforcing the 5% ratio when fins may be stored detached and even transhipped separately 
from carcasses is extremely difficult, as recently documented by Greenpeace on board the 
Shuen De Ching 888 vessel. This loophole compromises other CMMs including those for 
oceanic whitetip and silky sharks. In addition, transhipment of sharks and fins separately is 
currently allowed under CMM 2010-07, which compounds the difficulty in enforcing the relevant 
shark measures. This further reiterates the call by Greenpeace to ban all transhipment at sea 
(of all species including sharks) to close this loophole and support strong fisheries 
management, good data reporting and science and enforcement of the rules.  
 
8. Strengthen the Commission’s response to non-compliance and IUU fishing by ensuring 
that transparency is restored to this process and compliance documents are made available. 
Greenpeace recommends that the annual assessment of obligations is focused on priorities 
identified using a risk based approach. For the 2015 assessment of compliance, we suggest 
prioritising:  
a. Failure to provide operational level data 
b. Repeated non-compliance 
c. Violation of the FAD closure period 
d. Exceeding catch and effort limits 
e. Transhipment 
                                                           
3 http://grnpc.org/Shuen-De-Ching-No-888-shark-evidence 
 
