            
 
FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 
8-12 December 2008 
Busan, Korea      
WWF/TRAFFIC – POSITION PAPER 
WCPFC5-2008/OP02 
9 December 2008 
  
                                  
         
 
Introduction 
Recognizing that the WCPFC is now in its fifth year of existence, WWF and 
TRAFFIC believe that the time for significant action is well overdue in collectively 
agreeing to and implementing conservation and management measures for the 
sustainable exploitation of the Pacific’s tuna resources.  
 
The concern over the decline in bigeye tuna (BET) and yellowfin tuna (YFT) is 
not fully reflected in the management of fishing behavior. We must recognize that 
our inaction will make a mockery of our ability to take firm decisions and 
implement them when they matter most. The level of actions undertaken by the 
Commission over the last five years does not reflect the seriousness of the 
declining tuna stocks. 
 
WWF and TRAFFIC support the proposed Conservation Management Measure 
(CMM) for BET and YFT in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPO) to 
reduce fishing mortality of BET and YFT by the 30% recommended by the 
Scientific Committee.  
 
This position statement provides brief comment on all those matters that WWF 
and TRAFFIC believe are essential elements in order to achieve the required 
conservation outcomes with regard to reducing the overall fishing mortality of 
BET and YFT across all fishing sectors operating with in the WCPFC convention 
area, including bycatch of non-target species. 
 
 
Comprehensive Spatial and Temporal Closures 
WWF and TRAFFIC strongly support the implementation of a series of 
comprehensive flexible and adaptable temporal and spatial closures. These 
closures are urgently required to help protect key tuna spawning events within 
the Convention Area.  
 
WWF and TRAFFIC recognize that the timing and area for such closures will 
vary for each population. However, the Commission needs to establish a 
standing obligation to introduce and maintain such closures whilst allowing the 
Scientific Committee to advise the Commission on the optimal location and 
period for such closures each year.  
 
Furthermore, WWF and TRAFFIC strongly support the following proposed 
closures: 
 
o 3 month purse seine closure on the high seas;  
 
WWF and TRAFFIC believe that permanent closures of these areas to all fishing 
vessels must be considered in the near future, unless fishing is subject to 
measures that meet fishing nations’ obligations in international law to impose 
controls on their vessels fishing on the high seas ‘compatible’ with those imposed 
by adjacent coastal states within their EEZs. 
 
o 3-month FAD closure 
 
WWF and TRAFFIC further calls for an overall reduction of FADs used by 
catching vessels throughout the entire fishing year. It is essential to have 100% 
observer coverage during any FAD closure periods. If this cannot be agreed, 
then the alternative recommended by WWF and TRAFFIC is that all purse seine 
vessels must be confined to port during FAD closures. This is essential if 
compliance with FAD closures is to be ensured.  
 
Regional Observer Program 
WWF and TRAFFIC consider that all CMM’s must be underpinned by a 
comprehensive and strong Regional Observer Program (ROP) with 100% 
coverage of all fishing vessels (including both catching and support vessels). 
WWF and TRAFFIC consider that there are no reasonable impediments to 
immediate introduction of 100% observer coverage for purse seine catcher 
vessels and all support vessels while full observer coverage for longliners should 
be phased in over no more than five years. 
 
WWF and TRAFFIC suggests the following timetable for a 5-year phase-in of 
100% ROP coverage for all fishing vessels: 
 
o 2009 All support vessels (resupply, refueling, reefers) for all high seas 
fishing have 100% ROP coverage; 
 
2
o 2009 All purse seine vessels have 100% observer coverage; 
o 2009 10% of all longliners (including at least one from each flag state) 
have an ROP observer on board; 
o 2010 25% of all longliners (including at least one from each flag state) 
have an ROP observer on board; 
o 2011 50% of all longliners (including more than half of all vessels from 
each flag state) have an ROP observer on board; 
o 2012 100% of all longliners have an ROP observer on board. 
 
Catch Documentation Scheme 
WWF and TRAFFIC consider the failure to implement a catch documentation 
scheme (CDS) is a significant problem. Without an electronic CDS (eCDS), major 
gaps will exist in the management framework for fisheries regulated by WCPFC. 
 
WWF and TRAFFIC International recently tabled a joint report (The Case for a 
Catch Documentation Scheme in the Western and Central Pacific - WCPFC-
TCC4-2008/OP-01) at TCC 4. The paper examines experiences in the 
application of TDS/CDS by other RFMOs and reviews current international 
thinking on the relative merits of the two types of schemes as a basis for making 
firm recommendations in favour of eCDS as the appropriately effective 
documentation program for BET in the WCPFC. There is an emerging consensus 
in global fisheries fora that it is catch, rather than trade, documentation schemes 
that are required in order to verify catch data, to monitor catch against catch 
limits and to reliably inform markets and to minimize opportunities for the 
marketing of product derived from IUU fishing. 
 
This paper provides a clear direction for the WCPFC in its consideration of the 
appropriate form of documentation scheme for BET in the WCPFC. It would be 
shortsighted, and potentially compromise the status of stocks under its 
management, if the WCPFC were to ignore this direction.  
 
It is time for the WCPFC to take urgent action to address overfishing and to 
support and enforce that action by the introduction of a eCDS. WCPFC needs to 
ensure that all high seas fish stocks managed by RFMOs be subject to the eCDS 
as a proactive precautionary measure. WWF and TRAFFIC recognize that the 
introduction of an eCDS will pose some challenges to the WCPFC in the context 
of the nature of the fisheries for BET. However the WCPFC must work to 
overcome these challenges rather than using them as an excuse to implement 
second-best solutions in the form of a TDS. 
 
WWF and TRAFFIC recommend that the WCPFC must: 
 
1. Agree at its December 2008 meeting to adopt a CDS measure for BET at the 
2009 meeting (including any intercessional work to meet that timetable) with a 
date of implementation of 1 July 2010; 
 
 
3
2. Implement a eCDS that requires documentation to accompany all catch 
harvested, landed, transshipped, traded domestically, exported, processed, 
imported and re-exported and which relies on electronic documentation; 
 
3. Ensure that complementary measures are in place to maximize the 
effectiveness of the eCDS by: 
 
• bringing forward the implementation schedule for the ROP; 
• ensuring that a Commission VMS measure is implemented in 2009; 
• ensuring that transshipment at sea does not compromise the effectiveness 
of the eCDS; 
• adopting Port State measures (consistent with any global agreement likely 
to be agreed pursuant to the FAO-hosted negotiations currently underway) 
to take effect at the same time as the BET CDS; and 
• adopting measures that provide for trade-restrictive measures to be taken 
against flag States with vessels on the IUU list. 
 
4. Acknowledge the need to implement eCDS for other tunas and billfish 
managed by the Commission and, in particular, commit to the introduction of an 
eCDS for YFT and Swordfish Xiphias gladius by 1 January 2010; 
 
5. Commit to continuous improvement of the eCDS by investigation for example, 
of the benefits and feasibility of verification systems such as tagging and the use 
of biotechnology; 
 
6. Establish a capacity development fund to act as a cost-sharing mechanism to 
provide for cross subsidisation across wealthy and less-wealthy members to 
ensure the effective implementation and administration of the eCDS; and 
 
7. Maximize retailer and public access to CDS data. 
 
 
Bycatch Performance Measures 
This is a critical issue of concern to WWF and TRAFFIC. WWF and TRAFFIC are 
keen to ensure that the same urgency is given to developing and implementing 
corrective measures to recover populations of high conservation value non-target 
species as is being given to preventing collapse of populations of target fish 
stocks of high commercial value. WWF and TRAFFIC are particularly concerned 
at the impact of WCFPC regulated fisheries on sea turtles, sharks, rays and sea 
birds. 
 
Sea Turtles 
WWF and TRAFFIC recognize that sea turtle by-catch in longline fishing 
operations continues to be a problem in the Western and Central Pacific. Already 
a range of progressive measures have been introduced globally including the use 
of circle hooks in place of j-hooks. 
 
4
 
WWF and TRAFFIC further recognize that while trials and experiments on the 
use of circle hooks to reduce turtle by-catch have been, and are being 
undertaken around the world, the use of circle hooks as a turtle mitigation 
measure in the WCPFC area may be undermined by their impact on sharks. 
However, WWF and TRAFFIC believe that by using a combination of mitigation 
techniques, such as prohibition on the use of wire trace, could further mitigate 
sea turtle bycatch concerns while also decreasing the impact of circle hooks on 
shark bycatch. While insufficient data exists on the by-catch levels in the Western 
and Central Pacific, WWF and TRAFFIC urge the Commission to undertake 
precautionary measures in the absence of such data. 
 
In addition, we urge the WCPFC to mandate the carriage on all vessels and use 
of the following mitigation gears currently available to the fishery. This list is not 
exhaustive and there may be additional devices that should be included on this 
list: 
• turtle de-hookers; 
• line cutters; 
• circle hooks; 
• whole fish baits; 
• prohibition on the use of wire trace; 
• identification of sea turtle ‘hotspots’ and implement spatial and 
temporal closures as appropriate; 
• development of performance measures (bycatch trigger limit) for all 
sea turtle species; 
• Implementation of comprehensive management action if trigger limit 
activated. Such measures for adoption to include move on provisions, 
short term spatial and temporal closures, and restrictions on gear types 
(primarily longline) used in certain areas; 
• 100% observer coverage on longliners in EEZs and on the high seas. 
 
Sharks 
Sharks play a crucial role in the balance and health of marine ecosystems. They 
are slow-growing, longlived, and produce few young, which leaves them 
extremely vulnerable to overfishing. Most sharks also play an important role as 
top predators in the ecosystem and significant reductions in their numbers are 
likely to have impacts on other elements of those ecosystems. The extent and 
nature of those impacts are largely unknown. 
 
Given the role of sharks in ocean ecosystems it is essential that any fishery 
impacting on their populations must adopt Ecosystem Based Management 
(EBM) principles and be applied rigorously to the management of those fisheries. 
WWF and TRAFFIC note the fact that the WCPFC has adopted a conservation 
and management measure that came into effect as of 1 January 2008.  
 
 
5
However, recent evidence from SC4, based on the ecological risk assessment, 
indicates that there is no difference in catch rates for sharks by longliners above 
and below 24 m overall length. The SC stated that there appears to be no 
scientific basis to justify the current exemption for small vessels and 
recommended that the shark measure be revised to include vessels under 24 m. 
 
WWF and TRAFFIC strongly support the advice and recommendation of SC4 on 
this measure. Furthermore WWF and TRAFFIC recommend that any fin ratio 
must be based on wet weight, not dry weight, for both trunk and fins. This 
exemption makes the CMM adopted by the WCPFC the weakest of all shark 
measures adopted by any of the tuna RFMO’s. Hence WWF and TRAFFIC wish 
to see this exemption removed immediately at the upcoming Commission 
meeting. 
 
WWF and TRAFFIC recommend that the following action be taken immediately 
at this Commission meeting: 
• prohibition on the use of wire trace; 
• prohibition on the take of any shark, ray or shark, ray product by any 
WCPFC vessel until such time that specific shark and or ray species can 
be demonstrated to be harvested sustainably in terms of EBM; 
• development of performance measures (bycatch trigger limit) for all shark 
and ray species; 
• implementation of comprehensive management action if trigger limit 
activated. Such measures for adoption to include move-on provisions, 
short term spatial and temporal closures, and restrictions on gear types 
(primarily longline) used in certain areas; 
• identification of shark and ray bycatch ‘hotspots’ within the Convention 
area; and 
• 100% observer coverage on longliners in EEZs and on the high seas. 
 
Further information regarding the critical plight of sharks and recommendations 
to mitigate this issue is contained in the TRAFFIC report titled ‘Confronting Shark 
Conservation 
Head 
On’ 
located 
at 
the 
following 
URL 
- 
http://www.traffic.org/species-reports/traffic_species_fish4.pdf . 
 
Seabirds 
WWF and TRAFFIC are concerned at the outcome and lack of the seabird 
discussion at previous meetings. WWF and TRAFFIC believe that the seabird 
bycatch mitigation specifications should be minimum standards binding 
measures, not merely guidelines. The outcomes of SC3, SC4 and TCC3 have 
shown that the following actions need to be undertaken: 
• collaborative research must be encouraged on specifications that are not 
fully understood by CCMs; 
• ensure that tori lines include branch streamers along the aerial extent of 
the line and that the branch streamers are of a length that ensures that 
 
6
they would touch the surface of the water in the absence of wind and 
swell. 
• information and data sharing among CCMs; 
• stop using guidelines and specifications as negotiating tools either to buy 
time or to stall progress in agreeing to specific measures; 
• fishers must be clearly informed regarding operation of the specification of 
seabird mitigation measures; and 
• 100% observer coverage on longliners in EEZs and on the high seas. 
 
WWF and TRAFFIC believe that effective reporting measures (bycatch 
performance measures, trigger points and reference limits) coupled with 
appropriate action and timeframes if triggered (particularly with respect to 
sharks/rays, seabirds and turtles) are an essential element of any CMM for the 
sustainability of fisheries.  
 
CONCLUSION 
This Commission must be prepared to take the hard decisions to prevent 
fisheries collapse now. Scientists have been calling for large reductions in bigeye 
tuna catch for over a decade. Past performance of the Commission is, at best; 
slow to respond to such advice. This wavering could lead to the commercial 
extinction of the bigeye and yellowfin tuna fishery in the WCPO if effective 
management action isn’t adopted at this year’s Commission meeting. If the 
Commission doesn’t move fast on restoring stocks and preventing illegal, 
unreported and unregulated fishing, it will directly impact the viability of the 
region’s tuna fisheries, and the economies of developing countries. 
 
7
