 
 
COMMISSION 
 EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION  
Tumon, Guam, USA 
26-30 March 2012 
Shark statement to WCPFC8 from Shark Advocate International, Humane Society 
International and Project Aware Foundation- 2012 
WCPFC8- 2011/OP-11 
26March 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Position Statement for the 8th Regular Session of the  
Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission 
Guam, 26-30 March 2012 
 
 
 
Shark Advocates International, Humane Society International, and Project AWARE 
Foundation appreciate the opportunity to express our views on key shark conservation issues 
under consideration by the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC).  
 
Our organizations maintain a special focus on shark conservation due in large part to the low 
reproductive capacity that leaves most shark species exceptionally vulnerable to 
overexploitation.  We commend the WCPFC for identifying key shark species and dedicating 
resources to the comprehensive scientific investigation and assessment of regional shark 
populations and related fishery impacts. We believe that this remarkable work sets the 
WCPFC apart from most Regional Fishery Management Organizations (RFMOs) and serves 
as a sound basis for conservation action. We are deeply concerned, however, that an 
estimated 7% (or less) of the shark catch in the Western Central Pacific Ocean (WCPO) is 
controlled (through domestic catch limits), and that the WCPFC, unlike most other RFMOs, 
has yet to adopt species-specific shark conservation measures.  
 
Our specific concerns and science-based recommendations are detailed below. 
 
Oceanic Whitetip Sharks 
Strong evidence of the serious depletion of oceanic whitetip sharks (Carcharhinus 
longimanus) in the WCPO substantiates the need for immediate conservation action. To that 
end, our organizations strongly support the United States’ proposal that WCPFC Members, 
Cooperating Non-Members and Participating Territories (CCMs) prohibit the retention, 
transshipment, storage, on-board sale, and landing of oceanic whitetip sharks, and require 
that captured individuals of this species are promptly and carefully released, while ensuring 
that such interactions are reported in terms of number and status of animals.   
 
We believe this proposal is in line with the recommendation from the 7th Regular Session of 
the WCPFC Scientific Committee (SC7) for consideration of mitigation measures to reduce 
fishing mortality on oceanic whitetip sharks in the Convention Area. The U.S. proposal is also 
consistent with the 2011Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission Resolution for the same 
species in international waters of the Eastern Pacific Ocean. 
 
The once common oceanic whitetip shark is increasingly rare in the region’s tropical fisheries. 
Scientific analyses prepared by the Secretariat of the Pacific Community’s Oceanic Fisheries 
Programme (SPC-OFP) for SC7 based on multiple datasets documented clear, steep 
declines in oceanic whitetip abundance, catch rates (to near-zero levels), and size.  
 
Using observer data on shark condition and fate to compute expected mortality by species 
under various mitigation scenarios, an SPC‐OFP analysis estimated that “no retention” 
policies would reduce mortality to 30-60% of current levels (depending on species) and that 
requirements for prompt release unharmed may secure an additional 10-20% reduction in 
mortality for certain species including oceanic whitetips.  The paper concludes that a “no 
retention” with “prompt release unharmed” measure for oceanic whitetip sharks “would 
appear to be an appropriate and effective response to recent findings on the depleted status” 
of the oceanic whitetip stock.  
 
The same analysis notes that existing information does not allow a conclusion regarding the 
sufficiency of this measure for oceanic whitetip stock recovery.  As such, we also stress our 
support for the SC plan to prioritize this species for further investigation of fishery impacts 
and to conduct a stock assessment on oceanic whitetip sharks for SC8. 
 
Whale Sharks 
We are deeply concerned that an estimated 75 whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) were killed 
as a result of interactions with the region’s purse seine fishery in just two years (2009 and 
2010).  Whale sharks are classified by the International Union for Conservation of Nature 
(IUCN) as globally Vulnerable and listed under Appendix II of the Convention on International 
Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) and the Convention on Migratory Species (CMS). The 
lifetime value of a single whale shark to Belize tourism was estimated at more than $2 million 
U.S. dollars, while whale shark tourism worldwide has been estimated at nearly $50 million. 
 
Based on these factors, our organizations strongly support Australia’s proposal to ban deliberate 
setting of purse seine nets on whale sharks, to mitigate the impact of inadvertent encirclement, 
and to require logbook and observer reporting of all interactions to the flag State and to the 
Commission. We also support the adoption of best practice guidelines for safe release of 
encircled animals. These actions are in line with advice from SC7 and – together with 
obligations under national regulations, CITES, and CMS – should go a long way toward 
comprehensively managing fishery impacts on this globally threatened and economically 
important species. 
 
Blue Sharks 
The WCPFC SC has recommended that the WCPFC8 consider mitigation measures for blue 
sharks (Prionace glauca) in the north Pacific.  We share scientists’ concern over recent 
substantial declines in blue shark catch rates revealed in four different North Pacific datasets, 
in the face of unregulated targeting of the species by a large commercial fleet.  Analyses 
prepared for SC7 suggest that this population may no longer be above the biomass level 
associated with Maximum Sustainable Yield, and that simple catch limits, in combination with 
improved finning controls (see next section), are warranted as a first step toward reducing 
blue shark mortality in the North Pacific.  We urge the WCPFC8 to adopt such measures to 
prevent further depletion of the population.  We also support the SC plan to conduct a blue 
shark stock assessment for SC9. 
 
Shark Finning 
Analyses prepared by the SPC-OFP for SC7 reveal that, as of 2010, half of the WCPFC 
CCMs had not yet confirmed that the 2007 WCPFC ban on shark finning (slicing off a shark’s 
fins and discarding the body at sea) is being fully implemented in national waters, and even 
fewer have provided details related to application of and compliance with the 5% fin-to-
carcass weight ratio limit.  While the proportion of sharks finned in purse seine fisheries is 
decreasing, observer data provide no evidence that the WCPFC finning ban has reduced the 
proportion of sharks finned in longline fisheries.  SPC-OFP analyses point to stronger finning 
controls as a means to reduce excessive shark mortality. 
 
Our organizations, along with most other conservationists and scientists worldwide, strongly 
support the “fins naturally attached” method as the most reliable means for enforcing finning 
bans.  Under such a policy (through which at-sea fin removal is prohibited): 
 
 Enforcement burden is greatly reduced 
 Information on species and quantities of sharks landed is vastly improved 
 “High-grading” (mixing bodies and fins from different animals) is impossible 
 Value of the finished product can be increased. 
 
The technique of making a partial cut (allowing fins to be folded against the body) can address 
industry concerns about safety and efficient storage. 
Because of the numerous practical advantages associated with the fins naturally attached 
method, the policy has been mandated for most Central American and U.S. fisheries, and is 
gaining acceptance in international arenas, as reflected in:   
 
 The 2007 United Nations General Assembly Sustainable Fisheries Resolution 
 The 2008 IUCN Global Policy against Shark Finning 
 The 2010 Fish Stocks Agreement Review Conference on the Law of the Sea 
 
In order to increase the effectiveness of the regional shark finning ban and to facilitate the 
collection of species-specific shark catch data, we urge the WCPFC to adopt a requirement 
that sharks be landed with their fins still naturally attached.  
 
Other Shark Species and Mitigation Measures 
We note that improvements in finning controls and simple catch limits have also been 
suggested in SPC-OFP analyses for silky sharks (Carcharhinus falciformis), as a first step 
toward reducing mortality.  Although the species’ status has been described as “ambiguous”, 
silky sharks are dominant in the shark catch of both longline and purse seine fisheries in the 
region, and scientists suggest the number of removals may be on the rise.  We also support 
the SC plan to conduct a stock assessment on silky sharks for SC8. 
 
Two mako species (Isurus spp.) and three species of threshers (Alopias spp.) are considered 
key shark species by the WCPFC and are among the least productive of all pelagic sharks.  
WCPFC scientists have suggested further research and/or data improvement to identify and 
clarify population status trends for these species.  We support this recommendation as well 
as precautionary limits on take.  
We also support the SC7 recommendation for further investigations into the effectiveness of 
shark catch mitigation measures such as circle hook use, promotion of live release, deeper 
hook deployment, and prohibitions on targeting, retention, wire leaders, and finning. 
 
We join the SC encouraging adoption of the process for designating WCPFC key shark 
species for data provision and assessment, as proposed in document WCPFC8- 2011-IP/05, 
as well as general improvements in the collection of shark related data. 
 
 
References: 
Clarke, S. 2011. A Status Snapshot of Key Shark Species in the Western and Central Pacific and Potential 
Management Options. WCPFC-SC7-2011/EB-WP-04. Oceanic Fisheries Programme, Secretariat of the Pacific 
Community. 
Fowler, S. and Séret, B. 2010. Shark fins in Europe: Implications for reforming the EU finning ban. European 
Elasmobranch Association and IUCN Shark Specialist Group. 
Graham, R. 2004. Global whale shark tourism: a ‘golden goose’ of sustainable and lucrative income. Shark 
News 16: 8-9. 
SPC-OFP. 2012. Summary Information on Whale Shark and Cetacean Interactions in the Tropical WCPFC 
Purse Seine Fishery (Rev 1). WCPFC8 ‐2011‐IP‐01 (rev. 1). 
 
WCPFC. 2011. Summary Report of the Seventh Regular Session of the Scientific Committee WCPFC8- 
2011/14. 
 
 
