Commission for the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish 
Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean 
 
Fourth Regular Session 
 
2–7 December 2007 
Tumon, Guam, USA 
 
SUMMARY REPORT
 
 
AGENDA  ITEM  1  -  OPENING OF MEETING 
 
1.  
The Fourth Regular Session of the Commission for the Conservation and 
Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean 
(WCPFC4) took place from 2–7 December 2007 at Tumon, Guam, USA. The following 
Members attended: Australia, Canada, People’s Republic of China, Cook Islands, European 
Community (EC), Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), Fiji, France, Japan, Kiribati, Korea, 
Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI), Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Palau, Papua New 
Guinea (PNG), Philippines, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Chinese Taipei, Tonga, Tuvalu, United 
States of America (USA) and Vanuatu. 
   
2.  
Indonesia participated as a Cooperating Non-member (CNM). Participating 
Territories were represented by: American Samoa, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands, French Polynesia, Guam, New Caledonia, Tokelau and Wallis and Futuna. 
 
3.  
Observers from the following non-member countries attended the Session: Belize, 
Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico and Senegal.   
 
4.  
Observers from the following inter-governmental organizations also attended: the 
Agreement for the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP), Commission for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), Inter-American Tropical 
Tuna Commission (IATTC), International Scientific Committee for Tuna and Tuna-like 
Species in the North Pacific Ocean (ISC), Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA), 
Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat, Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC), and 
Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP).   
 
5. 
Observers from the following non-governmental organizations attended WCPFC4:  
American Fisheries Research Foundation (AFRF), BirdLife International, Earth Island 
Institute, Greenpeace, the Marine Stewardship Council, Pacific Island Tuna Industry 
Association, World Tuna Purse Seine Organization (WTPO), and World Wide Fund for 
Nature (WWF). 
 
2 
 
6. 
A List of Participants is appended (Attachment A). 
1.1 
Opening ceremony and welcoming address 
7.  
A Chamorroan chant was performed to open the meeting. The Honorable Felix P. 
Camacho, Governor of Guam, delivered a welcoming address. 
1.2 
Opening statements 
8.  
The Chair presented an opening statement that highlighted the positive developments 
in the Commission’s work over the past year, identified the key challenges for this meeting, 
and reviewed current challenges facing world tuna fisheries and the implications for the 
western and central Pacific Ocean (WCPO) (Attachment B).   
 
9.  
In its first statement as a new Member of the Commission, the USA expressed its 
pleasure at becoming a full Member with the same responsibilities and rights under the 
Convention as other Members, and the same level of commitment towards it success. The 
USA also expressed its appreciation for the consideration it had been given by other 
Members while it completed its ratification processes and pledged to work cooperatively with 
all Members, Cooperating Non-members and Participating Territories (CCMs) on the critical 
issues of stock sustainability, bycatch, and monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS). The 
USA’s statement is appended (Attachment C).  
 
10. 
New Zealand, as Chair of FFA, presented an opening statement on behalf of FFA 
members, thanking the WCPFC Secretariat for its work during the year and urging all CCMs 
to work together in a constructive manner to implement effective MCS measures and resolve 
issues related to bigeye and yellowfin tuna conservation and management measures (CMMs). 
The statement noted the challenges of addressing allocation concerns while acknowledging 
the sovereign rights of small island developing States (SIDS) to develop their fisheries in a 
responsible manner. Concern was also expressed regarding the activities of distant-water 
fishing nations that are not WCPFC Members and whose vessels may be undermining the 
Commission’s efforts to sustainably manage fisheries (Attachment D).   
 
11. 
Other CCMs submitted opening statements in written form (see Attachment E – 
Philippines; Attachment F – PNG; Attachment G – Korea; and Attachment H – New 
Caledonia).   
1.3 
Adoption of agenda 
12. 
The Commission adopted the agenda contained in WCPFC4-2007/02 Rev.1 and the 
provisional schedule of work contained in WCPFC4-2007/04 Rev.1.   
1.4   Meeting arrangements 
13. 
The WCPFC Executive Director, Andrew Wright, introduced WCPFC Secretariat 
technical staff attending the meeting, including Andrew Richards, Compliance Manager; Ken 
Smithson, Finance and Administrative Officer; SungKwon Soh, Science Manager; Karl 
Staisch, Observer Programme Coordinator; Ziro Suzuki, Japan Trust Fund Coordinator; 
Herolyn Movik, Office Manager; and Lucille Martinez, Executive Assistant. In addition to 
WCPFC Secretariat staff, four meeting participants provided support services: Dr Shelley 
 
3 
Clarke, rapporteur; Iain Hayes, VMS (vessel monitoring system) consultant; Dr Martin 
Tsamenyi, legal advisor; and Dr John Hampton from the Secretariat of the Pacific 
Community’s Oceanic Fisheries Programme (SPC-OFP), representing the Commission’s 
Scientific Services Provider.   
 
AGENDA  ITEM  2  -  MEMBERSHIP 
 
2.1 
Status of the Convention 
 
14. 
The depository for the Convention, New Zealand, presented WCPFC4-2007/06, 
summarizing the status of the Convention as of 27 October 2007. The only change to the 
Convention since the last Commission meeting in December 2006 (WCPFC3) was a 
notification that the Convention entered into force for the USA on 27 July 2007. An 
accompanying declaration from the USA authorized American Samoa, the Commonwealth of 
the Northern Mariana Islands and Guam to participate in the work of the Commission and its 
subsidiary bodies, in accordance with Article 43 of the Convention. 
2.2 
Applications for Cooperating Non-members (CNM) status 
15. 
The Executive Director noted that at WCPFC3, applications for CNM status were 
received from Belize, Indonesia, Senegal and the USA. Indonesia and the USA were granted 
CNM status at WCPFC3 and the USA has since become a full member. As described in 
WCPFC4-2007/07, issues for consideration by WCPFC4 included an application for renewal 
by Indonesia, and new applications by Belize, Ecuador, El Salvador and Senegal. Each 
applicant was requested to give a brief presentation.   
 
Indonesia 
 
16. 
Indonesia explained that it is in the process of ratifying the Convention and expects to 
become a full member of the Commission in 2008. Until that time, Indonesia requested 
permission to continue participating in the work of the Commission, particularly the ongoing 
data collection and fishery monitoring programme under the Scientific Committee (SC), as a 
CNM.  The Chair noted that Indonesia is a coastal State in the Convention Area, with a long 
record of cooperation with the Commission.   
 
Belize 
 
17. 
Belize highlighted its participation in several regional fisheries management 
organizations (RFMOs), including the IATTC and the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission 
(IOTC) as a CNM. In support of its application it has provided information requested by the 
Commission as well as additional information contained in WCPFC4-2007/OP5. Belize 
stated that it has a real interest in the WCPFC Convention Area, which dates from before the 
formation of the Commission. It noted that the United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement 
(UNFSA) calls upon States to participate in RFMOs and for such participation to be allowed 
without prejudice.   
 
Ecuador 
 
18. 
Ecuador’s statement (WCPFC4-2007/OP07) noted that it is a coastal State that has 
supported tuna fisheries in the WCPO for many years. Ecuador controls its high seas vessels 
under the international regulatory framework provided for under the UN Convention on the 
 
4 
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and is a contracting party of the IATTC. MCS measures, 
including 100% observer coverage, are applied in international waters outside of the IATTC’s 
jurisdiction. Satellite-based vessel monitoring systems (VMSs) will be made mandatory for 
its entire fishing fleet.   
 
 
El Salvador 
 
19. 
A statement from El Salvador (WCPFC4-2007/OP09) explained that its tuna purse-
seine fleet consists of four vessels operating throughout the eastern Pacific Ocean. As a 
member of IATTC, MCS measures such as 100% observer coverage and VMS are applied. 
The presence of its fishing vessels in the WCPO dates from 2001. El Salvador expressed an 
interest in applying for full WCPFC membership, if invited, in the future.   
 
Senegal 
 
20. 
Senegal (WCPFC-2007/OP08) cited its membership in the International Commission 
for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) and IOTC and the presence of VMSs on 
every vessel. After Senegal’s unsuccessful application for CNM status at WCPFC3, and after 
the Commission’s request for Senegal to remove its vessels from the Convention Area, 
Senegal noted it withdrew its vessels in March and August 2007.   
 
Discussion 
 
21. 
New Zealand, on behalf of FFA members, offered a flowchart to clarify the process for 
evaluating CNM applications (WCPFC4-2007/DP20). It was explained that although new 
procedures for CNM applications had also been put forward in the form of an FFA proposal 
for revisions to CMM-2004-02 (WCPFC4-2007-DP11), the flowchart is based on the 
currently applicable guidance contained in CMM-2004-02 and on the Convention. New 
Zealand, on behalf of FFA, stated that the flowchart should be applied such that all applicants 
undergo an equivalent evaluation and transparent process. New Zealand went on to note that 
there is no objection to Indonesia’s application from FFA members. Some delegations 
expressed reservations with respect to some of the flowchart’s content, and expressed the 
view that applications should be considered in accordance with CMM 2004-02. 
 
22. 
Several other CCMs noted that while they had no objection to Indonesia’s application, 
it would possibly now be entering its third year as a CNM and that positive progress towards 
ratification is now necessary. Concerns were also expressed regarding the participatory rights 
of applicants should CNM status be conferred, possible impacts on the development 
aspirations of SIDS, potential overcapacity in light of current concerns regarding the status of 
WCPO tuna stocks, and implications for the Commission’s MCS activities. Other CCMs 
stated the importance of separating issues of membership, participatory rights, fishing 
capacity in the Convention Area, and compliance issues associated with applicants (e.g. 
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing), from the need for transparent and fair application 
of the process outlined in CMM 2004-02. Still other CCMs noted their view that CMM 2004-
02 contains the tools to address these concerns given that all CNMs are obligated to comply 
with the Convention and all CMMs that are in force. 
 
23. 
The Commission approved an extension of Indonesia’s CNM application for one-year.     
 
 
5 
24. 
Chinese Taipei presented statements in support of Belize’s and El Salvador’s 
applications, citing a need for RFMOs to be open and inclusive. The statement noted that, 
since both States have already been fishing in the WCPF Convention Area, Chinese Taipei 
supported both States’ applications, noting that both States are cooperating with other 
RFMOs.    
 
25. 
Kiribati presented a statement supporting the applications of Ecuador and El Salvador 
(WCPFC4-2007/DP29).   
 
26. 
With respect to considerations for the four other CNM applications, the delegate from 
FSM recalled the Multilateral High Level Conference (MHLC) on South Pacific Tuna 
Fisheries experience. He noted that in 1999, the MHLC adopted a resolution that sought to 
place a moratorium on new participants in the MHLC, in an effort to restrict the future 
membership of the WCPFC. During the MHLC and PrepCon process, participants that are 
now WCPFC Members were required to make decisions on legitimate and real interest in this 
region. Considerations at that time included:  
• 
whether they were a coastal State of the region,  
• 
past fishing activities in the Convention Area,  
• 
level of demonstrated and sustained contribution to domestic and regional 
fisheries research,  
• 
contributions to management and development in the WCPFC region, and 
• 
demonstrated responsible fishing practices, including effective exercise of 
responsibility for its vessels and its nationals and compliance with regional and 
national conservation and management measures.   
 
The delegate from FSM also noted that decisions taken at that time have shaped the WCPFC 
membership. Furthermore, the the WCPFC Convention was designed to make it harder for 
new entrants to become Members, because of problems of overcapacity; also, because unlike 
other tuna regions, most participants are small island countries for which tuna resources are 
important. Pursuant to Article 35 of the WCPF Convention, MHLC participants can accede to 
the Convention at any time, whereas other non-MHLC participant States must be invited to 
become a Member by a consensus decision of the Commission. 
 
27. 
Because many CCMs requested additional discussion on these issues, the matter was 
referred to a working group chaired by Sylvie Lapointe (Canada).   
 
28. 
Subsequent to these discussions, some CCMs noted the importance of supporting the 
Commission’s own priorities of managing overcapacity and promoting SIDSs’ development, 
yet acknowledging the rights of States that are not CCMs to fish on the high seas in a 
responsible manner. These CCMs believed that some of the issues raised with regards to the 
applications for CNM status were actually issues relating to whether the implementation of 
the Commission’s management framework was sufficiently robust. Some CCMs articulated 
the Commission’s duty to encourage cooperation in managing stocks, particularly with States 
that have a history of fishing in the Convention Area, and to follow open and transparent 
criteria when considering CNM applications. 
 
29. 
Some CCMs suggested that CNM applications should be considered as an integrated 
issue, and particular issues of compliance with Commission resolutions and CMMs should be 
discussed separately.   
 
 
6 
30. 
Other CCMs considered whether the Commission’s ability to manage fishing capacity 
in the Convention Area may be jeopardized by denying CNM applications. These CCMs 
were concerned that the Commission’s tools for managing the fishing activities of non-
members are not as robust as its tools for managing the fishing activities of CCMs. In this 
regard, several CCMs stated that the existing regulation of high seas fishing activities is 
insufficient and is leading to encroachment of fishing rights within exclusive economic zones 
(EEZs). Consequently, these CCMs opposed actions that could lead to any further increase in 
high seas fishing activities.   
 
31. 
Some CCMs stated that CNMs and other non-members should be aware that presently 
and for the foreseeable future, stocks of yellowfin, bigeye, South and North Pacific albacore, 
swordfish and striped marlin that are regulated by the WCPFC are fully fished, and that 
fishing opportunities are therefore limited to new fisheries. In this regard, CNMs and other 
non-members should note that the WCPFC has agreed to conservation and management 
measures that limit participation in fisheries for yellowfin, bigeye, South and North Pacific 
albacore, swordfish and striped marlin. 
 
32. 
Australia, referring to WCPFC4-2007/DP32, reminded CCMs that participation in 
existing fisheries, including by CNMs, is limited by CMMs applicable to these stocks. Some 
CCMs expressed support for the concepts in WCPFC4-2007/DP32, while others commented 
that the format, the summarized nature of the presentation, the interpretation of some 
provisions of the CMMs, and the relationship of the paper to the CNM application would 
require further consideration.   
 
33. 
 Apart from Indonesia, whose application was approved on Monday, final decisions on 
the applications for CNM status were made on Friday, 7 December. 
 
34. 
 Prior to the consideration of each application, several CCMs, including the USA and 
Australia, supported a statement by Canada that expressed the view that each application 
needs to be considered fairly and objectively in light of criteria set out in CMM-2004-02 and 
that issues of increased fishing capacity and development aspirations, while very important, 
should be considered separately. Furthermore, it was expressed that the existing CMM was 
the only standard for assessing applications, and new rules or standards could not be imposed 
at WCPFC4. 
 
35. 
Concerning the application for CNM status by Belize, Dr Tsamenyi stated that he had 
reviewed the application against the legal requirements of CMM-2004-02, and with reference 
to the insufficiencies of the application identified by the Commission when Belize presented 
its application for CNM status to WCPFC3. Dr Tsamenyi noted that the application complied 
with all information requirements but that he was not in a position to comment on the 
technical quality of the data presented in the application.   
 
36. 
The Commission granted Belize CNM status for one-year.   
 
37. 
New Zealand inquired as to whether the Chair intended to address the issue of 
participatory rights for Belize at that point in the meeting.   
 
38. 
When the meeting returned to address this issue, Dr Tsamenyi clarified that under 
CMM-2004-02, once an application for CNM status is granted, the CNM is subject to all the 
obligations under existing and future decisions of the Commission. There is no basis under 
these procedures for differential treatment for a newly admitted CNM unless the CNM agrees 
 
7 
to such differential treatment. Dr Tsamenyi noted that amendment to CMM-2004-02 or to 
CMMs relating to allowable levels of bigeye tuna catches, may need to be undertaken to 
clarify these issues for future CNM applications but would not apply retrospectively to the 
decision taken with regards to Belize by WCPFC4.   
 
39. 
 New Zealand, supported by FSM, insisted that given the status of bigeye stocks and 
the provision in measure WCPFC 2005-01 calling for no increase in overall fishing effort on 
bigeye and yellowfin tuna, that Belize be required to limit its catches of bigeye tuna to its 
average catch  levels over the period 2001–2004, minus any amount that may have been 
double counted and attributed to coastal States; and that its fishing activities be limited to a 
total of five longline vessels in the North Pacific and two longline vessels fishing south of 
15oS, which are restricted to catching swordfish.   
 
40. 
Belize stated that it fully intended to comply with all applicable WCPFC CMMs and 
would voluntarily limit its annual bigeye tuna catches to 803.25 mt (i.e. its average annual 
catch over the period 2001–2004). Dr Hampton subsequently confirmed that this figure 
matched the catch records submitted by Belize to the Commission in support of its 
application. The Commission noted Belize’s commitment to full compliance and its voluntary 
limit on its bigeye catches. New Zealand supported this arrangement subject to confirmation 
that there had been no double counting of Belize’s bigeye catch (to be confirmed by SPC). 
 
41. 
Concerning the application for CNM status by Senegal, Dr Tsamenyi stated that he had 
reviewed the application against the legal requirements of CMM-2004-02. He stated that the 
application complied with all information requirements but that he was not in a position to 
comment on the technical quality of the data presented in the application.   
 
42. 
Canada, the USA and Vanuatu expressed support for Senegal’s application. The EC 
also spoke in favor of Senegal’s application, noting that it is a coastal State with a tradition of 
fishing, and a record of cooperation with other RFMOs.   
 
43. 
New Zealand and Niue did not support Senegal’s application, citing CMM-2004-02, 
paragraphs 5a and 5b, and finding that Senegal had failed to fully comply with the 
Commission’s request to remove all of its vessels from the Convention Area; and that the 
current status of fish stocks cannot support any increase in fishing capacity. New Zealand 
noted that the meeting had not fully discussed the issue of real interest in the fishery, which 
was relevant to the issue of a State’s right to participate in the fishery. New Zealand 
considered that there was a clear issue concerning whether Senegal has a real interest in 
fisheries in the WCPO. In addition, Australia expressed concerns regarding the ability of the 
Commission to meet the aspirations of new CNMs given the current status of fish stocks and 
the CMMs currently in place.   
 
44. 
Samoa noted its dissatisfaction with the development and implementation of CMMs to 
protect fish stocks, and stated that under such conditions it could not support applications for 
new CNMs at this time. 
 
45. 
Since the decision on CNM status could not be made by consensus, Senegal’s 
application for CNM status was rejected. The Commission noted that Senegal may bring 
forward a new application in the future should it so desire.   
 
46. 
Concerning the application for CNM status by Ecuador, Dr Tsamenyi stated that he 
had reviewed the application against the legal requirements of CMM-2004-02. He stated that 
 
8 
the application complied with most of the information requirements but lacked the required 
information concerning views on ratification of the Convention. He stated that he was not in a 
position to comment on the technical quality of the data presented in the application.   
 
47. 
Canada, the EC, the USA, Kiribati and Vanuatu expressed support for Ecuador’s 
application.   
 
48. 
New Zealand opposed Ecuador’s application, citing non-conformance with CMM-
2004-02, paras 5, 5c and 9, noting insufficiencies in submitted data; reports by the USA of 
incursions by Ecuadorian-flagged vessels into the WCPFC Convention Area, including into 
EEZs; no record of cooperation with WCPFC (e.g. voluntary submission of catch data); an 
inability of stocks, particularly bigeye tuna, to support additional fishing effort; and failure to 
demonstrate cooperation with the spirit of IATTC closure periods by simply transferring 
fishing effort to the same stock in another area.   
 
49. 
The USA clarified that the cases it had reported to the working group concerning 
Ecuadorian-flagged vessels had been settled, and that cooperation by Ecuador in investigating 
additional incidents had been satisfactory thus far. The USA indicated that Ecuador’s 
application should not, therefore, be rejected on this basis.   
 
50. 
Since the decision on CNM status could not be agreed on by consensus, Ecuador’s 
application for CNM status was rejected. The Commission noted that Ecuador may bring 
forward a new application in the future should it so desire.   
 
51. 
Concerning the application for CNM status by El Salvador, Dr Tsamenyi stated that he 
had reviewed the application against the legal requirements of CMM-2004-02. He stated that 
the application complied with all information requirements but that he was not in a position to 
comment on the technical quality of the data presented in the application.   
 
52. 
Canada, the EC, the USA, Kiribati and Vanuatu expressed support for El Salvador’s 
application.   
 
53. 
New Zealand opposed El Salvador’s application on the grounds that the basis for its 
application was a situation of overcapacity and overfishing in a neighbouring RFMO. It also 
noted a failure on the part of El Salvador to demonstrate compliance with WCPFC CMMs. 
New Zealand also expressed a general concern that through mechanisms such as flags of 
convenience, some CCMs were, in effect, circumventing CMMs by expanding their fishing 
effort in the WCPO by fishing under the flag of States seeking CNM status.   
 
54. 
The EC objected to the reference to a link between flag of convenience issues and 
CNM applications under consideration by WCPFC4.   
 
55. 
Since the decisions on CNM status could not be made by consensus, El Salvador’s 
application for CNM status was rejected. The Commission noted that El Salvador may bring 
forward a new application in the future should it so desire.   
 
56. 
With respect to the rights of unsuccessful applicants to fish within the Convention 
Area, Dr Tsamenyi explained that under international law, all States have the right to fish on 
the high seas as long as they discharge their international law duties to cooperate, fish 
responsibly, and have adequate measures to control their vessels on the high seas through, for 
example, authorization to fish and effective MCS measures. These States would only lose 
 
9 
their rights to fish on the high seas if they act in a manner that is inconsistent with 
Commission measures. Dr Tsamenyi noted that neither Ecuador nor El Salvador is a party to 
the UNFSA. Ecuador is not a party to UNCLOS and El Salvador has signed but not ratified 
UNCLOS. Dr Tsamenyi also noted that there are WCPFC CCMs that have not ratified 
UNFSA and/or UNCLOS.   
 
57. 
 New Zealand proposed that a temporary solution might be to allow vessels of El 
Salvador and Ecuador to continue fishing pursuant to their licences within the Kiribati EEZ, 
on the basis that such activity would be consistent with the provisions in CNM-2005-01, 
relating to the management of purse-seine effort within areas under national jurisdiction.   
 
58. 
Kiribati requested a special exception from the provisions of CMM-2004-02 in order to 
continue to authorize the nine purse seiners to continue fishing in Kiribati waters. RMI and 
New Zealand expressed support for such an exception on the understanding that Kiribati 
would license the vessels to fish only in the Kiribati EEZ and that no fishing on the high seas 
in the WCPFC Convention Area would be supported.   
 
59. 
The Commission granted a one-year exemption to Kiribati to allow six Ecuadorian, 
two El Salvadorean and one Panamanian purse seiners to fish within Kiribati’s EEZ. The 
Chair requested Kiribati to require these vessels to not fish on the high seas in the WCPF 
Convention Area.   
 
60. 
The Commission agreed to a derogation to CMM-2004-01 in order to allow these nine 
vessels to be placed on the Commission’s Record of Fishing Vessels, and to require that these 
nine vessels be fully monitored under all applicable WCPFC CMMs for one year.   
 
61. 
PNG expressed strong reservations against any actions that would continue to allow 
fishing in high seas areas just outside EEZs (“high seas pockets”). PNG believes this is 
leading to illegal incursions into EEZs and loss of coastal State resources, which is preventing 
the development of SIDS. It requested the Commission to take immediate action to impose 
compatible management measures on the high seas and in the EEZs of other non-Parties to 
the Nauru Agreement (PNA) CCMs.   
 
62. 
The Commission agreed that providing for compatible management measures for 
fishing on the high seas was a priority area of work over the coming year (see Agenda Item 
13). 
 
63. 
In response to the Commission’s decisions, Ecuador and El Salvador submitted 
statements to the Commission as WCPFC4-2007/OP14 and WCPFC4-2007/OP15, 
respectively.   
 
64. 
New Zealand clarified that its reference to flag of convenience issues was not linked to 
the applications from Ecuador and El Salvador, and apologized for any misunderstandings 
that may have arisen. New Zealand recognized both parties’ record of compliance with 
IATTC.   
 
65. 
The Chair noted that it is the nature of the WCPFC to engage in frank, but civil, 
discussions that reflect the accommodations reached between parties as a result of dealing 
with a number of contentious issues over the years, and any countries seeking to become 
Members need to understand how the WCPFC operates.   
 
10 
2.3 
Applications for observer status 
66. 
The Chair introduced WCPFC4-2007/08, which notes that applications for observer 
status were received from Chile, Mexico, Thailand, the American Fisheries Research 
Foundation and Oceana, and that no objections were received to these applications. The Chair 
noted the terms of participation by these observers under the Commission’s Rules of 
Procedures. Mexico presented a statement (Attachment I).  
   
AGENDA  ITEM  3  -  MEMBER REPORTS 
 
3.1 
Annual Reports by CCMs 
 
67. 
Part 1 of the Annual Report by CCMs — covering fisheries, research and statistics — 
was submitted to the Commission for 2006 by 24 CCMs, although 6 reports were outstanding 
at the time of WCPFC4. Part 2 of the Annual Report by CCMs for 2006 was received from 
20 CCMs. In addition to these outstanding reports for 2006, 6 CCMs have yet to submit 
Annual Reports to the Commission for 2005. The Chair urged all CCMs with outstanding 
reports to submit them to the Secretariat as soon as possible. New Zealand commented that 
the Secretariat’s annual reporting guidelines should be regarded as minimum standards, to 
allow for additional and contextual information to be added if necessary.   
3.2 
Statements by non-members 
68. 
The Chair invited non-members and observers to contribute written statements to be 
distributed by the Secretariat. 
   
AGENDA  ITEM  4  -  SCIENCE ISSUES 
 
4.1 
Report of the Third Regular Session of the Scientific Committee 
 
69. 
Dr Dae-Yeon Moon (Chair of the Scientific Committee, Korea) presented the summary 
outcomes of the Third Regular Session of the Scientific Committee (SC3) held in Honolulu, 
Hawaii, USA from 13–24 August 2007. Dr Dae-Yeon Moon advised that Mr Keith Bigelow 
was recommended by the SC to serve as Vice-Chair through 2009.   
 
70. 
The following issues addressed by SC3 were highlighted (SC3 Summary Report, para 
2).   
a. 
A review of fisheries in the WCPO and the eastern Pacific Ocean (EPO);  
b. 
A review of yellowfin tuna stocks in the Convention Area as well as northern 
area stocks, including albacore, Pacific bluefin tuna, striped marlin and 
swordfish; 
c. 
A review of the report on alternative stock status reference points; 
d. 
Bycatch mitigation issues and ecological risk assessment;  
e. 
Issues 
associated 
with 
the 
Regional 
Observer 
Programme, 
data 
confidentiality and dissemination, the Indonesia and Philippines Data 
Collection Project, and WCPFC Regional Tuna Tagging Project;   
f. 
Cooperation with other relevant organizations; 
g. 
Special requirements of SIDS and territories; 
h. 
Future work programme; and 
i. 
Administrative matters associated with the functioning of the SC. 
 
 
11 
71. 
Dr Hampton presented a summary of the status of fisheries for highly migratory 
species and some of the tuna stocks in the Convention Area (SC3 Summary Report, paras 16–
21 and 122–133).   
 
72. 
Some CCMs raised questions regarding a planned assessment of southwest Pacific 
swordfish. Australia proposed that this will be a full assessment led by Australia and New 
Zealand on behalf of the Commission, peer reviewed by SPC, and submitted to SC4 for 
further review and consideration of management actions. Scientists from all CCMs are 
encouraged to contribute relevant data analyses and biological insight to the assessment, and 
an informal workshop is being held at SPC in April 2008 to facilitate this exchange of ideas.  
 
73. 
The Chair noted that although a bigeye tuna assessment will be conducted next year, 
clear signals of stock status are already available, and thus a CMM will be considered during 
WCPFC4.   
 
74. 
In response to questions regarding bigeye tuna, Dr Hampton explained that the largest 
impact on the stock is by longlining, and if management actions were to be restricted to purse 
seiners, an effort reduction of approximately 75% from 2001–2004 average levels would be 
required to reduce overall fishing mortality to FMSY levels (MSY=maximum sustainable 
yields). He also explained that the 2006 stock assessment was based on limited species 
composition data, particularly with regards to data from Indonesia and the Philippines, and 
that results may change as data are refined. 
 
75. 
In relation to this point, Indonesia added that it has already begun reforming and 
further developing its data collection activities at Bitung in north Sulawesi, and that port 
sampling will be widened to include Sorong in West Papua during the period 2007–2011.   
4.2 
Response to CMMs 
76. 
Dr Dae-Yeon Moon presented eight responses by SC3 to five existing CMMs for 
consideration by WCPFC4.   
 
a. 
Concerning CMM-2006-01, SC3 identified areas of research collaboration with 
industry on juvenile bigeye and yellowfin tuna issues and is working to progress these. 
b. 
Concerning CMM-2006-02:  
i 
the SC progressed work on minimum technical specifications for seabird 
mitigation measures (this work was further considered at the Third Regular 
Session of the Technical and Compliance Committee (TCC3) and WCPFC4; 
see Agenda Item 8); 
ii 
new information on mitigation and interactions was reviewed but resulted in 
no amendments to existing measures; 
iii 
an analysis of seabird interactions and mitigation effectiveness will be 
included in the 2008–2010 work plan.  
c. 
Concerning CMM-2006-03, since there was no stock assessment for southwest 
Pacific swordfish in 2007, no advice was provided (see para. 73 regarding the impending 
assessment). 
d. 
Concerning CMM-2006-04, since there was no stock assessment for southwest 
Pacific striped marlin in 2007, no advice was provided.  
e. 
Concerning CMM-2006-05:  
i 
a list of shark species caught in the WCPFC Convention Area was 
formulated but identification of “key” species was not possible; 
 
12 
ii 
a fin-to-carcass ratio of 5%, as used in CMM 2006-05, was confirmed as 
reasonable.   
 
77. 
The Commission endorsed these eight items of advice from SC3.   
 
78. 
Some CCMs expressed concerns that the CMMs agreed on to date have not resulted in 
reductions in fishing mortality for bigeye and yellowfin tuna. Concerns were also expressed 
by FFA members regarding the mixing of politics and science during SC3, and the lack of 
parity in data provision by some major fishing States in comparison to those being provided 
by SIDS.   
4.3 
Advice and recommendations of SC3 to the Commission 
Stock status and management implications 
 
79. 
Based on the management advice and implications from SC3 on yellowfin (SC3 
Summary Report, paras 126–128), the recommendation to reduce fishing mortality rate on 
yellowfin from the current level was accepted by the Commission. Australia noted that MSY-
based reference points are not particularly precautionary and are generally considered to be 
limited reference points, rather than targets. Australia suggested that a target biomass of 20% 
above BMSY should be applied.  
 
80. 
Management recommendations for bigeye tuna, South Pacific albacore, southwest 
Pacific swordfish, and southwest Pacific striped marlin from SC2, and for WCPO skipjack 
from SC1, were considered by SC3 to be still current (SC3 Summary Report, paras 122, 130, 
132, 133, 129, respectively), and were endorsed by the Commission to be carried out over the 
coming year. In response to a question regarding the possibility that high levels of 
recruitment in bigeye tuna in recent years are an artifact of the stock assessment model, Dr 
Hampton explained this may be linked to an (as yet) unidentified environmental factor. He 
noted that similarly high levels of recruitment were found when the IATTC assessed bigeye 
tuna in the EPO but that a recent series of low recruitment years, and relatively high fishing 
pressure, have caused the stock status to change considerably. A discussion on the 
conservation and management measures relating to this stock was deferred to Agenda Item 8.   
 
81. 
The conservation advice from the ISC that fishing mortality for North Pacific albacore 
should not be increased from its current level (Fcurrent (2002–2004) = 0.75) and that with the 
projection based on the continued current high F the fishing mortality rate will have to be 
reduced ,was recommended to the Commission for endorsement by SC3 (SC3 Summary 
Report, para 140 and 163). WCPFC4 endorsed this recommendation.   
 
82. 
The conservation advice from the ISC that fishing mortality for Pacific bluefin tuna 
should not be increased above recent levels as a precautionary measure until the next stock 
assessment in 2008, was recommended to the Commission for endorsement by SC3 (SC3 
Summary Report, paras 146–152). WCPFC4 endorsed this recommendation.   
 
83. 
Concerning North Pacific striped marlin, SC3 received the conservation advice from 
the ISC that the fishing mortality rate of striped marlin should be reduced from the current 
level (2003 or before), taking into consideration various factors associated with this species 
and its fishery (SC3 Summary Report, paras 156 and 163). The Chair noted that spawning 
biomass in 2003 was estimated to be 14–15% of the 1970 level, depending on the model 
scenario used. The USA explained that while significant reduction in fishing mortality 
 
13 
appears warranted, this issue is complicated for a proper recommendation by the fact that this 
species is not a target species of the fisheries that catch it, and the fact that is has not been 
designated as a northern stock. As a solution for the Northern Committee to develop 
recommendations, this species should be designated as a northern stock for the Northern 
Committee be tasked to do the work that should then be presented to the SC and the 
Commission for further consideration. Further discussion of this issue was deferred to 
Agenda Item 6.   
 
Review of reference points 
 
84. 
WCPFC’s Science Manager, Sung-Kwon Soh, made a summary presentation on the 
Commission’s consultancy report, “Investigation of Alternative Stock Status Reference 
Points” 
(SC3-ME-WP-3). 
The 
Commission 
acknowledged 
and 
endorsed 
the 
recommendations of SC3 with respect to a future work programme on reference points, 
involving the development of a scoping paper and work plan, and addressing technical and 
organizational issues associated with implementation (SC3, Summary Report paras 169–170).  
 
85. 
New Zealand, on behalf of FFA, noted that although FFA members endorse these 
recommendations, the following issues should be considered by the scoping paper:. 
a.   
The work plan should include a strategy to include wide participation of CCMs, 
particularly by Pacific Island representatives; 
b.   
For the development of a management strategy evaluation (MSE), consider 
performance indicators that are relevant to both stock conservations and 
socioeconomic benefits derived from fisheries, including the distribution of 
benefits; 
c.   
The application of the MSE should be done using a staged approach, first 
applying to a single species such as North and South Pacific albacore so that 
CCMs can become familiar with the concepts and issues in a relatively simple 
case study; and 
d.   
The scoping paper should include work needed for the preparation of interim 
management strategies. 
 
86. 
In addition, New Zealand suggested the need for consideration of revised institutional 
arrangements for the Commission, such as a fisheries management working group for 
systematic analyses and discussions focusing on reference points, management objectives, 
strategies and measures. 
 
87. 
Some CCMs, while not disputing the usefulness of the report, cited it as an example of 
a lack of transparency or full participation, and requested the Commission to be fair and 
transparent in the scientific activities of the Commission. In relation to the second item 
suggested by New Zealand, two divergent views were expressed on the inclusion or not of the 
socioeconomic factors in this scoping study as a work of the SC, and in the end no guidelines 
were offered on this issue by the Commission.    
 
88. 
The Commission acknowledged and endorsed the recommendations of SC3 with 
respect to a future work programme on reference points, involving development of a scoping 
paper and work plan, and addressing technical and organizational issues associated with 
implementation. 
 
 
 
 
14 
Bycatch mitigation 
 
89. 
The Commission endorsed SC3’s recommendation to require data collection and 
reporting, through the Annual Report to the Commission, of shark catches to the lowest 
possible taxonomic level (SC3 Summary Report, para 197).   
 
90. 
Palau expressed reservations regarding the practicality of implementing accurate shark 
catch recording in cases where fins and carcasses are stored separately and DNA testing is not 
economically feasible. It also offered its view that since its national laws already require this 
level of specificity for shark recording, in this case, the use of observers would not 
substantially improve data collection with respect to species identification.   
 
91. 
The SC assisted with providing information on the specification, further development 
and refinement of measures to mitigate seabird bycatch (SC3 Summary Report, paras 191 and 
192).  This work was progressed by the TCC (TCC3 Summary Report, paras 99–106 and 
Attachment F) and continued under a working group at WCPFC4 chaired by Mr Robert 
Martinolich (Canada). The outcomes of the small working group are presented under Agenda 
Item 8.   
 
92. 
SC3’s consideration of strategies to reduce sea turtle interactions resulted in consensus 
on a list of tools and techniques available for safely releasing hooked turtles (SC3 Summary 
Report, paragraphs 209–213). A list of measures to reduce the capture or injury of turtles 
while maintaining target species catches required further discussion under a working group 
convened at WCPFC4 by Mr Ray Clarke (USA) and presented under Agenda Item 8.   
 
93. 
Several CCMs commented on the need to maintain consistency between seabird and 
sea turtle bycatch mitigation measures required by the WCPFC, and those required by other 
RFMOs.  While some CCMs stressed the need to harmonize measures, others advocated a 
more cautious approach in order to avoid reducing all measures to the lowest common 
denominator. There was consensus that the specifics of each interaction issue would need to 
be considered and that a universal solution might not be applicable to all gear types and 
fisheries.   
 
94. 
SC3 recommended an eight-part research programme, including industry-associated 
research, to support measures to reduce mortality of juvenile bigeye and yellowfin tuna (SC3 
Report, para 208). The Commission endorsed this recommendation.   
 
95. 
The SC’s recommendation to extend the ecological risk assessment (ERA) project 
through 2010 (SC3 Summary Report, paras 230–236) was adopted by the Commission.   
 
96. 
PNG noted that SIDS are not particularly well-informed on this topic. In order to 
improve understanding and participation, US$ 50,000 has been granted by PNG for an ERA 
training programme for FFA members facilitated through the SPC-OFP.   
 
Data and information 
 
97. 
SC3 recommended endorsement of six scientific objectives to be considered in the 
development of the Commission’s Regional Observer Programme (ROP) (given in Appendix 
II of the Statistics Specialist Working Group (SWG) Report, in the SC3 Summary Report). A 
related recommendation was that Appendix III of the Statistics SWG Report be used as the 
starting point for future discussions on minimum scientific data to be collected by the ROP, 
 
15 
that these minimum data fields be annotated with their meaning, purpose and format (SC3 
Summary Report, paras 237–245). The Commission endorsed these recommendations.   
 
98. 
Recommendations concerning access to and dissemination of data compiled by the 
Commission, and immediate implementation of the Information Security Policy, were 
forwarded to the Commission by SC3 for approval (SC3 Summary Report, paras 250, 251 
and 253). These recommendations were also endorsed by the Commission.   
 
99. 
The SC recommended continued work on the Indonesia and Philippines Data 
Collection Project (IPDCP), with additional funding support from the Commission for the 
activities under the IPDCP (SC3 Summary Report, para 255). The Commission endorsed this 
recommendation.   
 
100. Some CCMs expressed some unease regarding the continued lack of detail in the data 
from Indonesia and the Philippines. One CCM referred specifically to doubts about the 
ongoing requirements of the Commission to support data-related work in the Philippines — 
particularly since it appeared that the Philippines had funds to commit to review data-related 
issues as indicated in their WCPFC4 Opening Statement (WCPFC4-2007-DP22). Dr 
Hampton stated that he believes the Commission should continue to support this work in both 
Indonesia and the Philippines, and that much of the cost was for port sampling and fishery 
monitoring, rather than merely historical data review. The Philippines noted a savings of US$ 
6,253.66 from the previous budget, which it will carry over to next year as approved by the 
IPDCP Steering Committee (IPDCP-SC).   
 
101. Following the adoption of the Pacific Tuna Tagging Programme (PTTP) at WCPFC3, 
and subsequent to the positive review of the Project Document that was prepared for SC3 by 
the PTTP Steering Committee, the Commission encouraged CCMs to contribute voluntary 
funding support for Phase II of the PTTP (SC3 Summary Report, para 273). The Commission 
noted with appreciation, valuable contributions from New Zealand (NZ$ 5 million) and PNG 
(an additional US$ 100,000) to the project. Approximately US$ 6.4 million has been raised to 
date, meaning that an additional US$ 3.4 million is still required. Dr Hampton provided a 
presentation in which he highlighted that Phase I of the project, which received funding 
support from Australia, the European Community, France, New Zealand, PNG and the 
Global Environment Fund, had been an outstanding success, with high release numbers of 
skipjack and yellowfin (~ 70,000) and more than 7,000 recaptures reported to date. Phase II 
will focus on tagging in the western tropical Pacific, including, if possible, Indonesia and the 
Philippines using a pole-and-line vessel appropriately adapted for tagging. Dr Hampton 
explained that this work is expected to provide excellent information on stock dynamics, 
recent exploitation levels and, through an archival tagging component of the project, vertical 
migrations of juvenile bigeye and yellowfin tuna, which could be useful for mitigation of 
catches of those species.  
 
102.  New Zealand commented that while it was pleased to be able to provide significant 
funding for Phase II of the PTTP, it would like to see WCPFC incorporate the ability to 
resource such critical research into its core programme and budget, as well as explore ways 
that costs could be internalized within the fishing industry exploiting the resources.     
 
103. The SC recommended that in order to address important gaps in data submitted to the 
Commission, a prototype computer program for tracking CCM data submissions be 
developed and a study into the causes of the gaps be initiated (SC3 Summary Report, para 
279).  The Commission endorsed this recommendation noting that a prototype system for 
 
16 
tracking data submissions is already established on the WCPFC website. The Finance and 
Administration Committee (FAC) subsequently endorsed an allocation of US$ 15,000 to 
support this work.   
 
104.  The SC recommended that the guidelines for scientific data to be provided to the 
Commission be those documented in Appendix IV of the SC3 Statistics SWG Report, with 
further consideration at the Commission on the one square-bracketed paragraph (SC3 
Summary Report, paras 281–282). The Commission agreed all other paragraphs except the 
square-bracketed paragraph, and agreed to adopt the document “Scientific Data to be 
provided to the Commission” after the square-bracketed paragraph was resolved before the 
end of the meeting (see Agenda Item 7, para 235 below). 
 
105. New Zealand, on behalf of FFA members, reiterated concerns regarding a lack of 
operational level catch and effort, port sampling and observer data provision by some large, 
developed CCMs when SIDS are able to provide such data. The Chair responded that all 
CCMs are required to provide data to the same standard as described in the SC3 Summary 
Report, Attachment K “Standards for the Provision of Operational Level Catch and Effort 
Data”.     
 
Special requirements of small island developing States (SIDS) 
 
106. SC3 also recommended the continuation of stock assessment workshops for SIDS 
provided by SPC-OFP (SC3 Summary Report, para 302). The Commission also endorsed this 
recommendation. 
 
Administrative matters 
 
107. SC3 provided advice and received Commission endorsement on five administrative 
matters  (SC3 Summary Report, paras 321, 329, 331 and 332) including : 
a. Use a scoping document contained at SC3 Summary Report, Attachment P, 
to initiate an independent review of science structure and functions of the 
Commission;  
b. Continue use of the existing format for Part 1 Annual Report pending further 
consideration of a possible revision at SC4; 
c. Accept PNG’s offer to host SC4 at Port Moresby from 11–22 August 2008;  
d. Fully assess WCPO bigeye tuna (with consideration given to a possible 
Pacific-wide bigeye tuna stock assessment with IATTC), South Pacific 
albacore; and WCPO skipjack (2008/2009).   
 
108. With regard to these administrative matters, the Chair noted that the independent 
review of interim arrangements for the Commission’s science structure and function, once 
completed, can be used to inform the performance review of the Commission being promoted 
under the joint tuna RFMO performance review exercise. Some CCMs expressed a view that 
it will be critical to ensure the reviewers are independent and, thus, preferably not from 
CCMs.   
4.4 
SC 2008 work programme   
109. Dr Dae-Yeon Moon presented the SC’s Programme of Work for 2008 (SC3 Summary 
Report, Attachment O), explaining that out of the original list of 50–60 proposals, nine high 
priority projects were selected for the Commission’s funding in 2008:   
 
17 
a. Indonesia and Philippines Data Collection Project; 
b. Publication and distribution of Commission training and educational 
materials; 
c. Revised stock assessment of southwest Pacific swordfish; 
d. Refinement of bigeye parameters Pacific-wide; 
e. Regional study of the stock structure and life history characteristics of South 
Pacific albacore; 
f. Pacific-wide tagging project; 
g. ERA, including a productivity and susceptibility assessment (PSA); 
h. Characterization of species, size composition and spatial distribution of tunas 
aggregating around floating objects using underwater videos and other tools; 
and 
i. 
Development of a scoping paper, and draft work plan, on the potential costs, 
benefits and difficulties of alternative approaches for identification of 
appropriate reference points and implementation of an MSE within the 
WCPO. 
 
110. These projects were endorsed by the Commission.   
 
111. One CCM expressed concern regarding the fact that the proposed swordfish and 
albacore studies, while predominantly supported by external funding from CCMs’ individual 
budgets, required a minor contribution from the Commission budget. It was felt that 
establishing a precedent for such co-funding was inadvisable, and that if projects have merit 
they should be carried out even without a Commission contribution. Other CCMs noted that 
the Commission’s contribution was very small relative to the total project budget (6% for 
swordfish and 12% for albacore), and that such cooperative funding is fiscally wise given the 
Commission’s restricted funding environment.   
 
112. A final item in the SC work plan and budget was the provision of approximately US$ 
60,000 as unallocated budget for unforeseen costs, exchange rate variability and inflation. 
Some CCMs considered that such unallocated funds are a useful hedge against unanticipated 
costs, while other CCMs considered it unnecessary and poor practice. The Chair clarified that 
the unallocated amount does not appear in the 2008 budget and is provisionally allocated for 
2009 and 2010.   
 
113. It was also clarified that these projects, once approved, will be subject to decisions in 
the FAC regarding prioritization and budget limitations. In particular, while it would not be 
appropriate for the FAC to attempt to revise the individual project budgets, it would be within 
the FAC’s authority to reduce the number of projects in order to meet an agreed budget 
target.  Japan, having expressed continuing concerns regarding budget issues, consented to 
agree to the list of proposed projects on the understanding that their initiation would be 
subject to the final deliberations of the FAC and Commission sessions at WCPFC4 (see 
Agenda Item 10).   
 
114. Finally, several CCMs raised concerns regarding the transparency of the budget and 
the apparent ad hoc nature of its development process within the SC. The Chair asked the SC 
to address this concern in next year’s SC budgeting process.   
 
115. PNG, on behalf of FFA, suggested that the budget of US$ 650,000 for 2008 be used as 
a minimum budget for the 2009 and 2010 fiscal years.   
 
 
18 
116. The Commission expressed gratitude and appreciation to SPC for its work over the last 
12 months, and thanked the Chairman of the SC, Dr Dae-Yeon Moon.   
 
AGENDA  ITEM  5  -  NORTHERN COMMITTEE 
 
5.1 
Report of the Third Regular Session of the Northern Committee 
 
117. Mr Ben Tabios of the Philippines (Vice-Chair of the Northern Committee) presented a 
Summary Report of the Third Regular Session of the Northern Committee (NC3), which was 
held 11–13 September 2007 in Tokyo, Japan. Eight members and several observers attended 
NC3, including Vanuatu, which was admitted as a member of the NC at the end of NC3. 
Discussions focused on stock status of North Pacific albacore, Pacific bluefin, North Pacific 
swordfish, and North Pacific striped marlin as informed by submissions from the Seventh 
Plenary Session of the ISC (ISC7).   
5.2 
Response to CMMs 
North Pacific albacore 
 
118. Taking into account the ISC7 report, the NC agreed to maintain the existing CMM that 
requires CCMs to not increase fishing effort for North Pacific albacore.   
 
119. RMI, on behalf of FFA members, expressed support for the advice of NC3 with 
regards to North Pacific albacore. The Commission endorsed the recommendation from NC3.   
5.3 
Advice and recommendations of NC3 to the Commission 
Pacific bluefin tuna  
 
120. Noting the uncertainty in the stock assessment, NC3 advised its members to 
voluntarily not increase the fishing mortality rate of Pacific bluefin tuna, and to collect and 
submit data to facilitate the stock assessment.   
 
121. RMI, on behalf of FFA members, expressed support for the advice of NC3 with 
regards to Pacific bluefin tuna. The Commission endorsed the recommendation from NC3.     
 
North Pacific swordfish 
 
122. On the basis that a stock assessment is not anticipated until 2009, the NC considered 
that no action was required with respect to North Pacific swordfish at this time. 
 
Status of striped marlin as a northern stock 
 
123. NC3 noted SC3’s outcome that, based on the lack of presented information on the 
distribution of the biomass of this stock, it could not support designation of striped marlin as 
a “northern stock”. NC3 requested that the Commission renew its request to the SC to review 
all available information on this issue. The ISC is invited to provide relevant information to 
the SC in relation to this matter.   
 
124. Several CCMs expressed the view that striped marlin does not appear to meet the 
criteria for designation as a northern stock. 
 
19 
 
Conservation considerations for striped marlin 
 
125. Based on the recent ISC stock assessment, NC3 advised its members to make 
voluntary efforts to avoid increasing current fishing mortality rates on striped marlin.   
 
126. In preparation for developing an effective CMM, NC3 recommended that the 
Commission task the NC with convening a working group to examine the effects of fishery 
management measures already taken; spatial and temporal patterns of striped marlin catches 
and catchability; behavioural and technological methods for reducing incidental catches; 
methods for reducing catchability; and ways to encourage fishermen to develop and comply 
with practical measures; all to be considered at the next SC and NC meetings.   
 
127. The Commission requested that the NC form such a working group with a view 
towards developing a draft CMM, with SPC and FFA input, for consideration by the SC at 
SC4.   
 
128. Some CCMs cited their concerns about the apparent stock status and the lack of 
conservation and management actions. In addition, New Zealand and the Chair raised 
questions as to the transparency of the ISC assessment and lack of review of the actual 
assessment by the SC, with New Zealand emphasizing the importance of ISC assessments 
being presented in full to the SC for review.   
 
129. Japan considered that this issue is broader than the striped marlin assessment, and 
instead relates to the planned review of interim arrangements for the science structure and 
function of the Commission.   
5.4 
NC 2008 work programme  
130. Mr Tabios noted that existing biological data for North Pacific stocks was old 
information and that additional biological data are urgently required to reduce uncertainties. 
Given that Mexico catches a significant number of Pacific bluefin tuna but does not 
participate in the NC, greater cooperation with IATTC is anticipated for the future.   
 
131. Mexico expressed a strong interest in cooperating with the Northern Committee and in 
participating in management decisions for northern stocks.   
 
132. The Commission endorsed the work programme to be supported by members of the 
NC for the period 2008–2010. 
 
AGENDA  ITEM  6  -  TECHNICAL AND COMPLIANCE COMMITTEE 
 
6.1 
Report of the Third Regular Session of the Technical and Compliance Committee 
 
133. The Third Regular Session of the Technical and Compliance Committee (TCC3) was 
held in Pohnpei, FSM from 27 September–2 October 2007. A summary of the session was 
presented by Mr Wendell Sanford (Canada) who, as Vice-Chair of the TCC, acted as Chair of 
the meeting due to the resignation of the Chair Feleti Teo (Tuvalu). At the close of the 
meeting, Mr Sanford resigned as Vice-Chair and was nominated as Chair. Mr Noan Pakop of 
PNG was nominated as Vice-Chair.   
 
 
20 
Regional Observer Programme (ROP) 
 
134. Dr Charles Karnella (USA) chaired an Inter-sessional Working Group on the ROP 
(IWG-ROP) prior to TCC3. The report of this working group is contained at WCPFC4-
2007/13, Attachment 4, and the output of this working group forms Attachment D to the 
TCC3’s Summary Report. Dr Karnella reported that although there are many areas of 
progress on the ROP, an implementation schedule has yet to be formulated, costing 
arrangements were yet to be agreed upon, and the types and sizes of vessels to be included in 
the scheme have yet to be defined.   
 
135. Mr Sanford highlighted paras 18 and 35 of the TCC3 Summary Report as containing 
the recommendations in regard to ROP. He noted that pursuant to para 30 of the TCC3 
Summary Report, Canada funded the preparation of a legal opinion on liability and insurance 
issues associated with onboard fisheries observers, which is presented as WCPFC4-
2007/IP10.   
 
136. Several CCMs consider the ROP to be a critical element of the Commission’s MCS 
structure; without which, CMMs cannot be monitored or enforced, and IUU fishing activities 
combated. These parties favor preliminary implementation of the ROP, using existing 
regional and sub-regional observer programmes as an initial framework for implementation 
from 1 January 2008.   
 
137. Several other CCMs expressed a differing view regarding the prioritization of the 
ROP, given other Commission work items, budgetary constraints and the severe time limits 
of Commission staff.  Some of these CCMs consider that there are still significant issues to be 
resolved, for example the coverage rate and applicability to small-scale vessels before 
implementation of the ROP can be agreed on.   
 
138. There was, however, consensus that development of the draft CMM should continue 
on the margins of WCPFC4 via a working group. The Chair tasked Dr Karnella with leading 
this working group in an attempt to formulate an agreement to implement elements of 
existing regional or sub-regional observer programmes as a forerunner to the ROP. It was 
noted that a further physical meeting of the IWG-ROP, perhaps in April or May, 2008 might 
be necessary to begin integrating other elements of the ROP. China and New Zealand 
indicated a preference for the IWG-ROP to be held immediately prior to TCC4 in September 
2008.   
 
139. Further work during WCPFC4 on the development of the draft CMM for the ROP is 
presented under Agenda Item 8.1.   
 
Vessel monitoring system  
 
140. Mr Sanford highlighted para 52 of the TCC3 Summary Report, which commits to 
presenting scenarios for a proposed vessel monitoring system (VMS) budget to WCPFC4. A 
presentation by Mr Iain Hayes, consultant to the Secretariat, identified two basic scenarios:  
location of the system at Pohnpei or co-hosting of the system in another fully-supported 
environment. Within the second scenario, there are three options: a dedicated site 
(Commission VMS only), a shared site (with another VMS), and co-location with the FFA 
VMS in Sydney, Australia (the “Pacific VMS” option). Under the assumptions used in the 
analysis, the Pacific VMS option is significantly less costly to install, saving about US$ 
 
21 
750,000, relative to the Pohnpei option. This saving is equivalent to operating costs for three 
years. 
 
141. Mr David Marx (New Zealand) presented paras 53–62 of the TCC report, which relate 
to the Commission’s VMS. The Commission endorsed TCC’s recommendation for formation 
of a VMS Working Group, using Attachment A to WCPFC TCC3 2007/12 (Supplementary) 
as its terms of reference, to establish the standards, specifications and procedures for the 
Commission VMS as called for in the Convention. 
   
142. The Commission endorsed the outcomes of the VMS Working Group to date 
(Attachment E of TCC3’s summary outcome report) and directed them to continue to work 
(intersessionally and electronically wherever possible) to develop actual draft standards, 
specifications and procedures for the consideration of TCC4, and WCPFC5 in 2008. The 
Commission endorsed a budget of up to US$ 10,000 for the use of the Secretariat in support 
of this work. Mr Marx will continue to lead the VMS Working Group in 2008. 
 
143. Mr Marx highlighted that there were two parallel processes currently underway. The 
first is the domain of the VMS Working Group in developing standards, specifications and 
procedures for the use of the Commission VMS, and the second is the physical development 
of the Commission VMS. The Commission noted that in accordance with CMM 2006/06, 
both processes will be concluded and the Commission VMS should be in a position to be 
operable 60 days after WCPFC5. 
 
144.  Mr Marx indicated that he intended to circulate a “chair’s draft” early in 2008, 
articulating potential elements for the remaining terms of reference for the working group, 
with the view to using this paper to seek comments from the group to develop agreed upon 
elements that may be used in the formulation of a complete set of draft standards, 
specifications and procedures by the Secretariat.  
 
145. The material prepared through the Secretariat would then be circulated to the working 
group for comments, in advance of TCC4. Mr Marx noted that there may be a need for the 
working group to meet immediately prior to TCC4, and in the margins of that meeting, to 
work on these documents and that such time should be made available. The Commission 
endorsed this suggested approach. 
 
146. A small working group, convened by Mr Glenn Joseph (RMI) during WCPFC4, 
discussed WCPFC4-2007/25 as the basis for selecting the preferred option for the 
Commission VMS. After careful consideration of the options, it was agreed that the option of 
co-locating the Commission’s VMS with FFA’s VMS in Sydney, Australia (i.e. the Pacific 
VMS option) was clearly superior in terms of capital and operating costs, and would meet all 
performance standards. Therefore, the group recommended selecting the Pacific VMS option 
as the basis for further development. The report of the working group is appended as 
Attachment J. The Commission endorsed the group’s recommendation.     
 
147. In response to a query from Japan, the Chair and the Secretariat clarified that there is 
no intention to move any Commission function and staff associated with the VMS (or not) to 
locations outside of FSM. Japan stated its support for the VMS co-location options with an 
understanding that they were merely technical outsourcing options and would not change the 
functioning of the Commission and its Secretariat.   
 
 
22 
148. On the issue of costs, one CCM questioned why three Commission positions were 
proposed to support the VMS. The Chair clarified that the volume of vessel reporting will be 
high and that based on the experience at FFA, one professional and two technical staff will be 
needed.   
 
149. Several FFA members expressed support for the co-location of the Commission and 
FFA’s VMS, citing its compatibility, cost effectiveness, practicality, and speed of installation. 
Other FFA members supported co-hosting in general but needed more time to consider the 
implications of co-locating with FFA’s VMS.   
 
150. Some CCMs commented on technical specifications of the VMS, including issues of 
how to ensure data security and confidentiality, particularly in relation to maintaining 
completely separate FFA and WCPFC systems; how to prevent vessels from undermining the 
system; issues associated with non-reporting and whether, under co-hosted options, there 
would be any problems with remote access to data.   
 
151. With regards to the criteria used to determine which vessels would be required to 
participate in the Commission’s VMS, Indonesia explained that it has required VMS since 
2005 but only on those vessels exceeding 60 gross tonnes. Palau considered that the VMS 
must apply to small vessels since nearly all of its vessels would be below that size. The US 
stated that VMS units are installed on US vessels as small as 10 m. Guam commented that 
perhaps vessel range, rather than size, would be a more useful criterion for whether VMS 
participation should be required.   
 
152. Further work during WCPFC4 on the implementation of CMM-2006-06 for the VMS 
is presented under Agenda Item 8.1.   
 
Draft CMM for transhipment monitoring 
 
153. As a result of intersessional work since TCC3 (see TCC3 Summary Report, paras 74–
76), a draft CMM for transhipment monitoring was jointly prepared by Australia and Japan 
(WCPFC4-2007/DP03 Rev.2). A second proposal, developed by RMI (WCPFC4-
2007/DP08), was tabled for consideration at the Commission.   
 
154. CCMs discussed transhipment monitoring in broad terms. Views ranged along a 
spectrum, from those proposing to ban all transhipment at sea, to those wishing to allow the 
continuance of all existing transhipment operations.   
 
155. Those CCMs who proposed to allow transhipment at sea looked to the factors defined 
in TCC3 Summary Report para 75 as elements of a transhipment measure. They cited the 
importance of compatibility with other RFMOs that allow such activities, and consistency 
with the WCPF Convention text. These CCMs proposed a variety of MCS tools, including 
observers and VMS, for verifying transhipment operations. Most stated that requirements to 
tranship in ports results in fishing operations that are not economically viable. One CCM 
stated that definitions of “in port” could be problematic when transhipment occurs within 
reefs or other inland waters rather than in port. Another CCM stated that the Convention does 
not explicitly call for the banning of all transhipment at sea.   
 
156. CCMs who expressed a strong stance against permitting high seas transhipment varied 
on whether they might allow transhipment within EEZs or only within ports. However, they 
shared a scepticism that VMS and observers could be effective in transhipment monitoring, 
 
23 
and believed if verification is not technically possible then bans are an option. Many CCMs 
believed that a requirement to tranship in port would bring economic benefits to ports and 
encourage their development.   
 
157. Following permission by the Commission to speak, Greenpeace stated its support for a 
ban on transhipment at sea, citing it as a major loophole for IUU fishing as shown in their 
report on FSM and Kiribati.   
 
158. The Chair urged parties to work towards a consensus proposal during WCPFC4. It was 
noted that in the absence of a CMM on transhipment, under the Convention a ban on purse-
seine transhipment on the high seas will apply except for a one-year exemption for the 
Philippines and FFA members.   
 
159. Further work during WCPFC4 on the development of the draft CMM for transhipment 
is presented under Agenda Item 8.1.   
 
Port State measures 
 
160. Mr Sanford referred to para 82 of the TCC3 Summary Report, which notes that FAO is 
developing an international port State measures instrument that, as part of the process, will 
include a technical consultation on port State measures in 2008. Partially for this reason, 
TCC3 recommended deferring this issue to TCC4.   
 
161. Without objection to the recommendation, several CCMs who are also FFA members, 
voiced their support for port State measures and urged the TCC’s work not be slowed by any 
delays that might be associated with an attempt to align with the FAO process.   
 
162. The Commission agreed to defer consideration of port State measures to TCC4.   
 
Vessel chartering schemes 
 
163. CCMs were reminded that the recommendation of TCC3 was to defer action on this 
issue to TCC4 (TCC Summary Report, para 87).   
 
164. Japan considered that charter arrangements could be important development tools for 
SIDS. However, it noted that, without charter guidelines approved by the Commission, it 
faces difficulties to supporting efforts by the Japanese fishing industry to promote charter 
arrangements in the WCPO because of the issues associated with ensuring compliance with 
applicable CMMs.   
 
165. The Commission agreed to defer consideration of vessel chartering schemes to TCC4.   
 
Catch documentation schemes 
 
166. The final MCS item discussed by TCC3 was catch documentation schemes (CDSs) 
(see TCC3 Summary Report, para 91). In support of this topic, FFA circulated WCPFC4-
2007/DP24, which contains a proposal on harmonization and improvement of trade tracking 
programmes by Canada, the EC and the USA from the RFMO technical working group in 
Raleigh, North Carolina.  Commenting on this proposal, Canada noted that WCPFC is the 
only RFMO with no tuna document programme.   
 
 
24 
167. Australia, on behalf of FFA, noted that previous proposals submitted to WCPFC on 
this topic have not been sufficiently comprehensive nor integrated with other essential MCS 
components. These CCMs support the formation of an interesessional working group to 
examine the experience of other RFMOs and how it can be applied to the WCPFC.   
 
168. The EC introduced its new proposals for trade tracking and legal provenance 
verification of fish products,1 stating that the goal of these procedures is not to restrict trade 
but to discourage IUU fishing. The EC offered to develop a proposed CDS for bigeye tuna 
based on the joint proposal submitted to the Raleigh meeting by Canada, the USA and the 
EU. In response to a question from the Chair regarding whether the EC’s new measures will 
apply to EC vessels’ landings, the EC clarified that products generated by EC fishing 
operations will be regulated under a separate revised control regulation.   
 
169. Japan voiced its doubt regarding the need for and effectiveness of CDSs in the WCPO, 
adding that the specific points raised in Japan’s paper (TCC3-2007/DP-06) need further 
consideration.    
 
170. Further work during WCPFC4 on the development of a CDS is presented under 
Agenda Item 8.1.   
6.2 
Response to CMMs 
Record of Fishing Vessels and Authorization to Fish (CMM-2004-01) 
 
171. TCC3 made several recommendations to the Commission regarding vessel information 
provided to the Secretariat as part of the Commission’s Record of Fishing Vessels. One 
recommendations was for CCMs to provide all the required information and advise the 
Executive Director of changes to their respective Records of Fishing Vessels as required in 
CMM 2004-01. Another recommendation was to add an “active/inactive vessel in the 
Convention Area” field in the Record of Fishing Vessels (TCC3 Summary Report, paras 
136–138). The Chair noted the particular importance of the latter recommendation in 
providing an accurate measure of existing activity.   
 
172. Most CCMs expressed general support for the TCC3 recommendations for both 
administrative and scientific reasons. They acknowledged the need to distinguish between 
those vessels that are authorized to fish, and those that are actually active in the Convention 
Area.  Australia announced that it had prepared a proposal to establish a list of such active 
vessels.  Discussion of this occurred under Agenda Item 8.   
 
173. Several CCMs indicated concerns with the potential for the Record of Fishing Vessels 
to be used to determine capacity, calculate operational days, or provide other management 
input.  These CCMs believe that the details of how, and which data to be used in such 
management considerations, should be deferred for later specification.   
 
174. Further work during WCPFC4 on the development of revisions to CMM-2004-01 on 
the Record of Fishing Vessels and Authorization to Fish is presented under Agenda Item 8.1.   
 
 
                                                 
1 See http://ec.europa.eu/fisheries/cfp/external_relations/illegal_fishing_en.htm 
 
 
25 
 
Temporary Register of Carrier and Bunker Vessels (CMM-2004-01) 
 
175. The TCC recommended that the temporary register of non-CCM flag carrier and 
bunker vessels be extended until 31 December 2008 (TCC3 Summary Report, paras 151–
153).  The Chair noted that a draft CMM on this issue will be presented by RMI (WCPFC4-
2007-DP09) under Agenda Item 8.1.   
 
Fishing Activities of non-CCM Flagged Vessels in the Convention Area (CMM-
2004-01)  
 
176. The matter of non-CCM flagged vessels fishing in the Convention Area was discussed 
by TCC3 but not resolved (TCC3 Summary Report, para 141).   
 
177. Kiribati stated that its decision to license non-CCM flagged vessels to fish in Kiribati 
waters was taken under circumstances of extreme economic hardship and was not intended to 
flaunt the regulations of the Commission. To remedy the situation, Kiribati asked the flag 
States and owners to join the Commission as CNMs. Kiribati noted the vessels have shown 
good compliance with license requirements.   
 
178. The Kiribati-licensed vessels consist of six Ecuadorian vessels, two El Salvadorean 
vessels and one Panamanian vessel, all of which are purse seiners. Because Ecuador’s and El 
Salvador’s applications for CNM status were unsuccessful, none of these States will be 
CNMs during 2008.  
 
179. Dr Tsamenyi explained that UNCLOS grants sovereign rights to all coastal States to 
decide which parties they allow to fish within their EEZs, provided the fishing activities are 
not inconsistent with the conservation and management obligations of the coastal State. 
However, CMM 2004-01, under which CCMs have committed to allowing only CCMs to 
fish in their EEZs, has limited those sovereign rights. Therefore, CCMs that allow a non-
CCM to fish in their EEZ are in violation of Commission measures and the Convention.   
 
180. New Zealand noted that as Chair of the Forum Fisheries Committee (FFC), the New 
Zealand Minister of Fisheries had written to Kiribati to highlight the importance of regional 
solidarity and express concern that Kiribati’s actions undermine effective management of the 
resources by both FFA members and by WCPFC, which will result in a loss of economic 
benefits to the whole region.    
 
Bigeye and Yellowfin Tuna in the WCPO (CMM-2005-01 and CMM-2006-01) 
 
181. TCC3 recommended that in 2008, the Secretariat include in its Annual Report 
compliance with all data reporting obligations, and noted the information provided by the 
Commission Data Manager in relation to CMM-2005-01 and CMM-2006-01.   
 
Annual reports to the Commission 
 
182. TCC3 requested that the Secretariat develop a discussion paper on reporting 
compliance with CMMs. Several FFA member CCMs, including the Cook Islands, PNG, 
Samoa and Australia, spoke in favor of improved compliance reporting.   
 
 
26 
183. China and the EC expressed their view that the responsibility for evaluating 
compliance should lie with the TCC rather than the Secretariat.   
 
184. In response to comments from Samoa that reporting can sometimes be troublesome for 
CCMs, it was noted that the SPC-OFP will hold a workshop on Part 1 reporting next year.   
6.3 
Advice and recommendations of TCC3 to the Commission 
Seabird mitigation 
 
185. The results of the small working group meetings to finalize the text of minimum 
technical specifications for seabird mitigation measures under CMM-2006-02, were 
presented by the chair of the small working group, Mr Martinolich. Consensus was reached 
on suitable text and editing to remove all bracketed text remaining from deliberations held 
during TCC3.  The revised text was presented as WCPFC4-2007/22.   
 
186. Australia, on behalf of FFA, spoke in support of adopting the new specifications, citing 
the need for collaborative monitoring and research between CCMs in order to assess the 
effectiveness of key measures and further develop them as required.   
 
187. The USA noted that once the new specifications are adopted, some of the language of 
CMM-2006-02, such as that referring to the need to adopt such specifications and the 
guidelines the use of which was encouraged until adoption of such specifications, will need to 
be revised.  The USA offered to lead this re-drafting and the Commission accepted this offer. 
The revised CMM was considered under Agenda Item 8.1.   
 
Sea turtle mitigation 
 
188. Development of a draft CMM for sea turtle mitigation progressed at TCC3 (TCC3 
Summary Report, paras 113–121) and underwent further discussions in the margins of 
WCPFC4 via a small working group under the leadership of Ray Clarke (USA). Given that 
there are still several major issues to resolve, the Commission agreed to refer the matter to 
TCC4 but asked the working group to map out a process through which momentum can be 
maintained to bring a draft measure to WCPFC5.   
 
189. Several CCMs, including Australia, China, the EC, Japan and the USA noted that 
circle hook trials were recently completed, underway or planned in their fisheries.   
 
190. These CCMs and FFA members noted the importance of making progress not only 
with the draft CMM but also with planning for implementation, including understanding 
spatial and temporal interaction patterns, consulting and informing fishermen, and developing 
monitoring measures.   
 
Juvenile bigeye and tellowfin tuna 
 
191. The Chair of the TCC referred to the discussion of mitigation measures for juvenile 
bigeye  and yellowfin tuna taken around fish aggregation devices (FADs) (TCC3 Summary 
Report, para 131–133). TCC3 recommended that an intersessional group work towards 
tabling a draft CMM at WCPFC4. An FFA member’s proposal for a draft CMM was 
discussed under Agenda Item 8.1.   
 
 
27 
High seas boarding and inspection 
 
192. TCC recommended a number of specifications related to high seas boarding and 
inspection procedures to the Commission for approval (TCC3 Summary Report, para 168–
178). The acting Chair of the TCC thanked Canada and French Polynesia for providing a 
French version of the procedures. It was proposed that if Korea wished to develop a draft 
inspection checklist, the TCC could consider this matter at a subsequent meeting.   
 
193. In response to a comment from Fiji, it was clarified that there is no intention to 
maintain a register of inspection officials, only of inspection vessels (TCC3 Summary Report, 
para 172).   
 
194. Chinese Taipei and Palau requested that a common format identity card be used by all 
inspection personnel. However, other CCMs believed this would be impractical and the 
acting Chair of TCC explained that this is why such a card was not proposed by TCC3.   
 
195. The Commission agreed to endorse TCC3’s recommendation that the information in 
Attachment A to WCPFC-TCC3-2007/11 (Rev.1), including photos of individual inspection 
vessels, but excepting information regarding individual inspection officers and vessel contact 
details, should be posted for public access and circulated to CCMs.   
 
196. Regarding samples of inspection personnel identity cards (TCC3 Summary Report, 
para 173), the Commission endorsed TCC3’s recommendation that future review of a 
universal format for CCM inspection identity cards may be desirable.   
 
WCPFC IUU Vessel List 
 
197. Mr Sanford noted that the TCC prepared its first Provisional IUU Vessel List at TCC3. 
It considered six vessels and placed five of these on the Provisional List (TCC3 Summary 
Report, paras 190–198).   
 
198. Cook Islands provided additional background on the provisional listing of the 
Venezuelan purse seiner Athena F, noting that this vessel was again detected within the EEZ 
of Cook Islands without a license to fish from 14–15 November 2007. It noted that since the 
vessel had not yet been placed on the Commission’s IUU Vessel List, the sanctions contained 
in CMM-2006-09 do not yet apply. Cook Islands requested the assistance of the Commission 
in bringing this vessel and its owner before the courts, and in prohibiting the provision of port 
services to this vessel.   
 
199. The EC inquired as to whether there have been any communications from the 
Venezuelan Government regarding this matter. The Secretariat clarified that two letters have 
been sent to the Venezuelan Government but there has been no response.   
 
200. The Commission adopted the TCC’s recommendation to place the Athena F on the 
IUU Vessel List for unauthorized fishing by a vessel flagged to a non-CMM in the 
Convention Area.   
 
201. Chinese Taipei provided an update on the status of the incident involving the Jinn Feng 
Tsair No.1, a longliner flagged to Chinese Taipei. This vessel was apprehended in FSM’s 
waters but fled to Chinese Taipei where it was sold. Chinese Taipei officials were not 
informed of the incident by FSM officials until after the vessel had been sold. Subsequently, 
 
28 
Chinese Taipei suspended the license of the vessel’s captain for one year. Although the 
current owner claims no knowledge of the incident, judicial proceedings to determine 
whether there was any link between the former and current owners were continuing. Chinese 
Taipei requested that the Jinn Feng Tsair No.1should not be included on the IUU Vessel List 
since the procedures in the Commission had not been followed by the other related State.  
 
202. FSM acknowledged that discussions with Chinese Taipei regarding this incident were 
unresolved but were continuing. Given this, FSM maintained its request for WCPFC4 to 
place the vessel on the IUU Vessel List. If the matter is successfully resolved (i.e. if Chinese 
Taipei imposes sanctions of adequate severity or establishes that the previous owner no 
longer has any real interest, CMM-2006-09, para 20), the vessel may be removed from the 
list intersessionally.   
 
203. Several CCMs supported FSM’s position, stating that the incident is a serious one, and 
that the burden of proof lies with the current vessel owner to demonstrate there is no link with 
the vessel at the time of the incident.   
 
204. Japan noted that procedural issues relating to communication between the CCMs 
involved in this incident have contributed to difficulties in resolving it, and that a mechanism 
should be developed to avoid such issues in the future.   
 
205. The Commission endorsed the TCC’s recommendation to list the Jinn Feng Tsair No.1 
on the IUU Vessel List, noting that the vessel can be removed from the list intersessionally 
upon an exchange of letters between the involved CCMs and the Commission, stating that the 
issue has been resolved.   
 
206. FSM and Chinese Taipei agreed to resolve the matter of the Jinn Feng Tsair No.1 in 
this manner.   
 
207. France provided further information relating to TCC3’s placing of the Vieirasa Cinco 
and the Robaleira on the Provisional IUU Vessel List for unauthorized swordfish operations 
on the high seas between French Polynesia and New Zealand. France clarified that it, rather 
than French Polynesia, nominated these two Senegalese longline vessels to TCC3 for 
inclusion on the Provisional List. One distinction between the two vessels concerns the 
timing of inspections. The Vieirasa Cinco was inspected in Papeete in November 2006 and 
on the basis of this inspection it was proposed for the Commission’s IUU Vessel List. France 
reported that the vessel was again sighted in the area in August–September 2007. The 
Robaleira was inspected at the end of March 2007.   
 
208. One CCM questioned the basis for nominating the Vieirasa Cinco because:  
a. the request to Senegal to remove its vessels from the Convention Area, 
subsequent to its unsuccessful application for CNM status at WCPFC3 in 
December 2006, was made in February 2007 (i.e. after the inspection);  
b. CMM-2006-03, concerning swordfish, did not enter into force until 15 
February 2007; and  
c. CMM-2006-09 also did not enter into force until 15 February 2007.   
 
209. Dr Tsamenyi cautioned that due process and careful consideration of evidence are 
required when making decisions about the IUU Vessel List. If the vessel in question was 
fishing illegally in an EEZ, then under international law, there is a clear violation of the 
coastal State’s laws and regulations. However, if the vessel was detected fishing on the high 
 
29 
seas, it can only be considered to be undertaking an IUU fishing activity if it is flagged to a 
State that is not discharging its flag State responsibility of cooperating with the Commission. 
Cooperation by a flag State with the Commission may be demonstrated by, inter alia: 
a. joining the Commission as a CCM (including cooperating as a CNM); or,  
b. agreeing to mirror the CMMs of the Commission.  
 
210. Dr Tsamenyi noted further that the key question in relation to the IUU listing of these 
vessels relates to whether they were authorized to fish. It is not sufficient to conclude that 
these vessels were not authorized to fish by CCMs of the Commission, since they may have 
been authorized to fish by Senegal according to its rights under the UNFSA. During the 
inspection, Senegalese high seas permits were not found onboard the vessel. However, these 
permits were produced and sent to the Commission after TCC3’s decision to place the vessels 
on the Provisional IUU Vessel List. It is not clear whether the vessels’ failure to carry the 
permits onboard while fishing is a violation of Senegalese law. The permits provided by 
Senegal appear to be valid fishing permits. In determining whether any specific violations of 
Commission CMMs occurred, the Commission could view its decision to refuse CNM status 
to Senegal at WCPFC3 in December 2006 as a reflection of its non-cooperation, specifically 
since inadequate data on fishing activities had been provided. The Commission may then 
determine that the flag State is not cooperating with the Commission and on this basis, ask 
the flag State to withdraw its vessels from the Convention Area.   
 
211. Vanuatu offered additional information on the conduct of these two vessels in 
Vanuatu’s waters. Beginning in April 2006, one-year fishing licenses were granted by 
Vanuatu to these two vessels. When these licenses expired, they were not renewed but 
Vanuatu is satisfied that both vessels complied with its requirements.   
 
212. Cook Islands noted that it had exercised port State measures against the two vessels 
(based on the decisions at TCC3) by refusing port services to both vessels in September 2007.   
 
213. Dr Tsamenyi said that in the case of the Vieirasa Cinco, the alleged violation occurred 
prior to the implementation of the CMMs, which are not to be applied retroactively, and prior 
to the request to Senegal to withdraw its vessels from the Convention Area. In the case of the 
Robaleira, the violation occurred after Senegal had been requested to withdraw its vessels 
from the Convention Area and after the CMM on swordfish and IUU had come into force. 
Although the Robaleira is not authorized to fish by the Commission’s CCMs, valid fishing 
permits have been provided by Senegal.   
 
214. The Commission agreed not to place the Vieirasa Cinco and the Robaleira on the IUU 
Vessel List.   
 
215. France reviewed the information pertinent to the case of the Daniela F, a Venezuelan 
flagged purse seiner found to be engaging in unlicensed fishing for tuna in France’s EEZ in 
April 2007. Subsequent to the inspection, the vessel’s captain admitted the offence, and 
France imposed appropriate penalties on the vessel under French law.   
 
216. Several CCMs questioned whether the vessel should be listed given that the violation 
occurred within France’s EEZ and France had already imposed penalties on the vessel.   
 
217. Other CCMs noted that if the full range of offending behaviors has not been punished, 
then listing the vessel by the Commission on its IUU Vessel List may still be warranted. 
 
 
30 
218. Dr Tsamenyi advised that one of the important considerations under CMM-2006-09 is 
whether the flag State has taken effective action in response to the alleged violation, such as 
removing the vessel from its registry or taking other actions to ensure that further IUU fishing 
by the vessel does not occur.  
 
219. The Commission adopted the TCC’s recommendation to place the Daniela F on the 
IUU Vessel List for unauthorized fishing in France’s EEZ. It was agreed, however, that an 
appropriate response by Venezuela concerning the exercise of its flag State responsibilities 
may provide grounds for intersessional deletion of the vessel from the list.   
 
220. Mr Sanford noted that TCC3 recommended that work on revisions to CMM-2006-09 
continue intersessionally, with a view to presenting a draft proposal to WCPFC4. 
Submissions on this topic were received from the USA (WCPFC4-2007/DP15), Korea 
(WCPFC4-2007/DP16) and Chinese Taipei (WCPFC4-2007/DP19) and are presented under 
Agenda Item 8.1.   
 
Data issues 
 
221. TCC3 made several recommendations to the Commission in relation to data access, 
dissemination and security (TCC3 Report, paras 214–217). Discussion of these issues was 
deferred to Agenda Item 7.  
 
Consideration by TCC of applications for CNM status 
 
222. TCC3 recommended to the Commission that it require CNM submissions to be 
received 30 days in advance of the annual TCC meeting, so as to allow TCC to review 
applications and provide technical advice (TCC3 Summary Report, para 229).   
 
223. The EC noted that TCC’s workload was already too great and, thus, it should not be 
further burdened with reviewing CNM applications. It was suggested that an ad hoc working 
group of the Commission would be better suited to the task.   
 
224. Some CCMs, including the USA, Australia and New Zealand, disagreed, noting the 
existence of relevant expertise of the TCC in these issues and the fact that forming an ad hoc 
working group would not necessarily relieve resource constraints. 
 
225. The Chair agreed to postpone a decision on this item until after the CNM application 
discussions were concluded, and if not resolved by WCPFC4, to defer this issue to TCC4 and 
WCPFC5.   
 
Dates for TCC4 
 
226. The EC stated that the agreed upon dates for the next TCC meeting (TCC3 Summary 
Report, para 242) would conflict with the meeting of the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries 
Organization (NAFO) and recommended a slight postponement of the dates.   
 
227. Japan and New Zealand, however, indicated existing commitments conflict with the 
EC’s proposed dates.   
 
228. The Chair noted the need to resolve such conflicts, to find a suitable timeframe for the 
TCC, and to hold the meeting in that period each year.   
 
31 
6.4 
TCC 2008 work programme  
229. It was noted that the TCC had approved the four primary elements of the technical and 
compliance programme budget for 2008 as being the VMS, including funding to support the 
VMS Working Group; funding for regional liaison by the Observer Programme Coordinator; 
Boarding and Inspection implementation; and implementation of website design work on the 
bycatch mitigation component. Costing proposals for the VMS were discussed in a small 
working group chaired by Glenn Joseph of RMI. The latter three items were discussed in the 
FAC.   
 
230. New Zealand commented that the process employed by TCC3 to develop the 
programme of work was considerably more informal than that by the SC.  In their view 
technical priorities should be agreed before the budgets are discussed in the FAC.   
 
AGENDA  ITEM  7  -  RULES AND PROCEDURES FOR THE PROTECTION, 
ACCESS TO, AND DISSEMINATION OF DATA COMPILED BY THE 
COMMISSION 
 
231. Ms Holly Koehler (USA), who chaired a small working group on data at TCC3, 
presented recent progress on the refinement of existing rules and procedures for access to, 
and dissemination of, data compiled by the Commission (WCPFC4-2007/12). The underlined 
text in this document represents the outcome of discussions held at SC3 and TCC3 on 
revisions to the rules and procedures that were adopted at WCPFC3 as a “living document”. 
The revised rules and procedures contained as Attachment C in this paper were recommended 
for WCPFC4 endorsement by TCC3.   
 
232. The Commission adopted the rules and procedures as contained in WCPFC4-2007/12, 
Attachment C.   
 
233. Ms Koehler then introduced a draft framework for access to different types of non-
public domain data, a draft data request form and a draft confidentiality agreement 
(WCPFC4-2007/12 Suppl.). Progress on these supplemental documents was initially impeded 
by lack of agreement on the rules and procedures document (described above in para 231), 
but was progressed during and subsequent to TCC3. Since TCC3, comments were received 
from Japan and Korea (WCPFC4-2007/12) and incorporated by the Secretariat in the form of 
underlined text in WCPFC4-2007/12 Suppl., Attachment A.   
 
234. The Commission adopted the documents following a minor refinement proposed by 
the USA that the Framework, Data Request Form and Confidentiality Agreement be 
incorporated in the newly adopted “Rules and Procedures for the Protection of, Access to, 
and Dissemination of, Data Compiled by the Commission”.   
 
235. Mr Keith Bigelow (USA), Vice-Chair of the SC, presented a residual issue regarding 
the provision of catch and effort data east of the eastern boundary of the Convention Area (as 
contained in SC3 Report, Attachment K, Appendix 4, part 4). As described in WCPFC4-
2007/21, a small group recommended that the brackets be removed from the text as it stands 
and this was endorsed by the Commission. The SC’s Vice-Chair noted that discussion of this 
issue could continue through consultation with IATTC including the WCPFC-IATTC 
consultation held during WCPFC4.   
 
 
32 
236. The USA presented TCC3’s recommendation to the Commission that the Ad Hoc Task 
Group–Data be resumed to develop the separate rules and procedures for the protection of, 
access to and dissemination of non-public domain data for the purpose of compliance and 
enforcement activities on the high seas, as well as to consider the other data security and 
exchange issues noted by the VMS working group (TCC3 Summary Report, para 215). New 
Zealand supported the TCC’s recommendation.   
 
237. The Chair, noting previously expressed concerns by CCMs regarding the workload of 
the TCC and its working groups, recommended that work on this issue be progressed 
electronically.  The Commission endorsed TCC’s recommendation for continuation of the 
work, through electronic communication, of the Ad Hoc Task Group–Data. 
   
AGENDA  ITEM  8  -  CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT MEASURES 
 
8.1 
Conservation and management measures 
 
Review of existing measures 
 
Resolution on the Reduction of Overcapacity (Resolution-2005-02) 
 
238. This resolution calls upon CCMs — whose nationals are beneficial owners of purse 
seiners that entered the WCPFC Convention Area after the MHLC and PrepCon resolutions 
and other concerned CCMs — to work together to ensure that the beneficial owners reduce, 
by 31 December 2007, such overcapacity as created by those fishing vessels through the 
reduction of equivalent fishing capacity of other fishing vessels operating in the Convention 
Area. Given the impending deadline for the resolution, CCMs were invited to comment on 
their progress.   
 
239. Chinese Taipei reported that, in order to support its commitment to WCPFC to 
maintain purse seiners at levels not exceeding 34 vessels, it has abolished the licenses of 8 
vessels. In addition, it has scrapped 35 large-scale tuna longliners with ultra low-temperature 
freezers operating in the Convention Area during 2005–2007, resulting in a 41% reduction 
from the original number of 86. With these two actions, Chinese Taipei feels it has fully 
implemented the resolution. Japan and China expressed appreciation for Chinese Taipei’s 
efforts in reducing overcapacity. There were no objections from other members. 
 
240. The Philippines reported that of the original number of purse-seine vessels of 3,500–
5,000, only 1,200 vessels remained in 2006. A moratorium on new vessels has been in place 
since October 2003.   
 
Specifications for the Marking and Identification of Fishing Vessels (CMM-2004-
03) 
 
241. This measure provides the specifications for marking fishing vessels. It was noted that 
the clarity of photos submitted as part of the Record of Fishing Vessels are often unclear and 
need to be improved in order to illustrate markings.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
Resolution to Mitigate the Impact of Fishing for Highly Migratory Fish Species on 
Sea Turtles (Resolution-2005-04) 
 
242. This resolution encourages CCMs to implement the FAO Guidelines to Reduce Sea 
Turtle Mortality in Fishing Operations and to compile data and conduct research on this 
subject. This work will be progressed by an intersessional working group led by the USA. 
The working group will communicate electronically. 
 
Record of Fishing Vessels and Authorization to Fish (CMM-2004-01) 
 
243. Proposals from RMI and Australia to revise this CMM were considered under Agenda 
Item 8.1, New Conservation and Management Measures. 
 
Cooperating Non-members (CMM-2004-02) 
 
244. WCPFC4 received new applications from Belize, Ecuador, El Salvador and Senegal 
for CNM status and an application from Indonesia to renew its CNM status.  These decisions 
in relation to these applications are presented under Agenda Item 2.   
 
Conservation and Management Measures for Bigeye and Yellowfin Tuna in the 
Western and Central Pacific Ocean (CMM-2005-01 and CMM-2006-01) 
 
245. These CMMs provide for registration of existing regional or bilateral fisheries 
partnership agreements or arrangements; effort limits for purse-seine fisheries between 20oN 
and 20oS; bigeye tuna catch limits for the longline fishery; capacity limits for other fisheries 
excluding artisanal fisheries; conditions for exemptions for certain developing skipjack purse-
seine fisheries; and the development and submission to the Commission of FAD management 
plans and catch retention plans (CRPs) for purse-seine vessels. With regards to FAD 
management plans and CRPs, TCC3 has made various recommendations for concerted action 
by CCMs, liaison with other RFMOs on experience and research, and the importance of the 
Regional Observer Programme in supporting these plans.  
 
246. The Secretariat noted that although CMM-2005-01 required information to be 
submitted by the time of WCPFC3 in December 2006, several CCMs had submitted the 
required information at different times during 2007. At the time of WCPFC4, 13 bilateral 
agreements, including a recent submission by Korea regarding a bilateral agreement with 
Tuvalu, had been received. These are summarized in WCPFC4-2007/13 (Table 4).   
 
247. FFA members noted that access agreements are only required to be registered with the 
Commission under the footnote to CMM 2005-01 if a CCM wants them taken into account 
for the purpose of establishing limits under CMM 2005-01. FFA members requested that the 
reference to the footnote be clarified in future reports of this kind, if necessary by quoting the 
complete text of the footnote instead of part of it.   
 
248. PNG emphasized the need for more to be done to stop overfishing of juvenile bigeye 
and yellowfin tuna, in particular, closing areas of high seas “pockets” that are being exploited 
by IUU operations.   
 
249. New Zealand raised concerns that tables in Attachment A of WPCFC4-2007/13 were 
being presented in a way that suggested certain CCMs were in breach of their obligations 
under WCPFC 2006-01 when the data included in those tables were for periods before that 
 
34 
measure was adopted by the Commission, and that the table made interpretations with regards 
to measurement of fishing effort that went beyond those in the measure itself. The Secretariat 
explained that the purpose was simply to provide an indication of how recorded levels of 
fishing effort compared with those provided for in the measures.   
 
250. The EC noted that Attachment A of WPCFC4-2007/13 shows zero catch for the EC, 
although there are EC vessels operating in the Convention Area.   
 
251. The Secretariat noted that a skipjack fishery development plan has been received from 
Australia (WCPFC4-2007/DP06). One Member expressed concern in light of excessive 
fishing capacity over resources as well as developing perspectives of SIDS. 
 
252. PNG stated its opinion that it was inappropriate for the Secretariat to require CCMs to 
submit skipjack fishery development plans for within their own EEZs, as developing such 
fisheries is a sovereign right of CCMs.   
 
253. The Chair reminded CCMs that the deadline for submitting FAD management plans to 
the Secretariat is 1 January 2008, and that thus far PNG is the only CCM to have submitted a 
FAD management plan. Other CCMs were urged to submit their plans before the deadline to 
avoid contravening the CMM. Australia submitted a FAD management plan to the Secretariat 
during WCPFC 4. 
 
254. The deadline for CRPs was September’s TCC3 meeting. Australia, New Zealand and 
Vanuatu are the only CCMs to have submitted CRPs to the Secretariat.   
 
Conservation and Management Measure for South Pacific Albacore (CMM-2005-
02) 
 
255. This measure provides that CCMs shall not increase the number of their fishing vessels 
actively fishing for South Pacific albacore in the Convention Area south of 20ºS above 2005 
levels or historical (2000–2004) levels. The Executive Director noted that there is currently 
no means to measure active fishing above the 2005 level or the recent historical 2000–2004 
levels because the level of effort south of 20oS is not reported on by fleets active in that area. 
Therefore, the Secretariat requested CCMs to provide a clear delineation of their catches in 
this area.   
 
256. Tonga, on behalf of FFA members, noted the concerns raised at the SC3 about 
potential loopholes that could limit the effectiveness of the South Pacific albacore CMM. 
They requested the Commission to require CCMs to submit data on their catch of albacore, 
and the number of vessels fishing for albacore, south of 20ºS. The Commission agreed that 
CCMs must submit this information.  
 
Conservation and Management Measures for North Pacific Albacore (CMM-2005-
03) 
 
257. This measure requires CCMs to report catches of North Pacific albacore. The first 
report was due on 30 April 2006 for the calendar year 2004. Catch reports have been received 
for 10 CCM fleets. The Secretariat noted that the SC, TCC and NC all suggest that data gaps 
are a problem. Seven CCMs have reported data covering 10 gear types, but most cover annual 
catches and there is very little six-month reporting as is required under the measure. The 
Chair reminded parties to ensure compliance with the reporting requirements.   
 
35 
 
Conservation and Management Measures to Mitigate the Impact of Fishing for 
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks on Seabirds(CMM-2006-02) 
 
258. Under this measure, CCMs fishing in the area south of 30oS and north of 23oN shall 
submit specifications of seabird mitigation measures by 30 November 2007. Only the USA 
and Australia have submitted this information.   
 
Conservation and Management Measure for Swordfish in the Southwest Pacific 
(CMM-2006-03) 
 
259. CCMs were required to report, by 1 May 2007, the number of vessels that had fished 
for swordfish in the Convention Area south of 20oS during the period 2000–2005, and thus to 
nominate the maximum number of vessels that may continue to be permitted to fish for 
swordfish in this area.  Six CCMs have provided this information to the Commission and two 
other CCMs, Vanuatu and the USA, have provided other related information.   
 
260. Samoa stated that it has not nominated an applicable limit for its vessels fishing for 
swordfish because, in accordance with paragraph 2 of CMM-2006-03, as a SIDS, it considers 
Samoa to be exempt from such a limit. It was suggested that this point should be clarified for 
future reference.   
 
261. Some CCMs expressed concerns about the impact on swordfish data arising from the 
various landing practices by EC vessels. The EC clarified that regardless of landing location, 
all relevant data were reported to SPC, which is the Commission’s data manager.   
 
Conservation and Management Measure for Striped Marlin in the Southwest Pacific 
(CMM-2006-04) 
 
262. CCMs were required to report, by 1 July 2007, the number of vessels that have fished 
for striped marlin in the Convention Area south of 15oS during the period 2000–2004, and 
thus to nominate the maximum numbers of vessels that may continue to be permitted to fish 
for striped marlin in this area. Four CCMs have provided this information to the Commission 
and two other CCMs, Vanuatu and the USA, have provided other related information.   
 
263. The USA clarified that the fleets listed in their submissions under CMM-2006-03 and 
CMM-2006-03 were catching these species in small numbers as bycatch.   
 
264. Japan explained that it did not submit the information pursuant to CMM-2006-03 and 
CMM-2006-04 because any swordfish or striped marlin caught by Japanese fishing vessels in 
these areas is bycatch.   
 
265. French Polynesia also said their swordfish and striped marlin catch is bycatch but they 
offered to submit the data to the Commission’s data manager, SPC-OFP, for their records.  
 
266. FFA members noted that the comment by Samoa in relation to swordfish (see para 255 
above) also applied with respect to striped marlin.  
 
 
 
 
36 
Conservation and Management Measure for Sharks in the Western and Central 
Pacific Ocean (CMM-2006-05) 
 
267. This measure calls for voluntary implementation of the FAO’s International Plan of 
Action–Sharks, and initiated work by the SC to identify key shark species and review the fin-
to-body weight ratio that vessels fishing in the Convention Area are allowed to retain. The 
measure will be implemented by 1 January 2008 for vessels greater than 24 m in overall 
length.    
 
268. The USA drew CCMs’ attention to recent developments at the UN General Assembly 
regarding shark conservation and management. The Commission noted that States and 
RFMOs will increasingly be called upon to adopt measures to manage both directed and non-
directed shark fisheries.   
 
Other conservation and management measures  
 
269. CMMs pertaining to the Vessel Monitoring System (CMM-2006-06), the Regional 
Observer Programme (CMM-2006-07), Boarding and Inspection Procedures (CMM-2006-
08) and the IUU Vessel List (CMM-2006-09) underwent further development at WCPFC4 
and are reported on in the following section.   
 
270. Dr Tsamenyi advised that the failure by CCMs to implement CMMs adopted by the 
Commission may result in their vessels being considered as undertaking IUU fishing 
activities under the international plan of action (IPOA)-IUU. A vessel flagged to a CCM may 
be considered to be fishing illegally if it is fishing in contravention of the CMMs adopted by 
the Commission. A vessel flagged to a CCM may be considered to be engaged in unreported 
fishing if it does not report, or if it mis-reports its catches in contravention of the 
Commission’s CMMs. A vessel flagged to a CCM may be considered to be undertaking 
unregulated fishing if the Commission fails to develop appropriate CMMs.    
Consideration of new measures and other conservation requirements 
New CMM for the reduction of mortality of juvenile bigeye and yellowfin tuna 
 
271. Discussions on developing a new CMM for reduction of fishing mortality for juvenile 
bigeye and yellowfin tuna were initiated based on a proposal tabled by FFA members 
(WCPFC4-2007/DP12). The proposal contained three major elements: full catch retention 
requirement in purse-seine fisheries, a three-month fixed period purse-seine FAD closure, and 
a 25% reduction in fishing mortality for bigeye tuna catches in longline fisheries based on 
recommendations of the SC.   
 
272. Many FFA-member CCMs, along with Greenpeace, voiced their support for the 
proposal.   
 
273. Tuvalu expressed concerns about the impacts of a FAD closure on its economy.  
 
274. Palau noted that mandatory reductions in fishing mortality based on historical catches 
in the longline fishery would pose serious problems because it estimates that its catches were 
actually double those reported due to illegal transhipment activities.   
 
 
37 
275. Some CCMs, including Australia and the EC, believed that the FFA proposal did not 
go far enough toward conserving bigeye and yellowfin tuna stocks, and suggested that further 
and stricter measures would be required in addition to the proposal.  
 
276. Other CCMs, including China, Japan and Chinese Taipei, were of the view that 
exemptions requested by various coastal States would result in a FAD closure only on the 
high seas area and a catch reduction of 25% for bigeye tuna in the longline fishery did not 
seem to fairly balance the interests of different CCMs.  Those CCMs felt that the impact of 
the implementation of CMM-2005-01 was not yet known and that scientific information 
currently available, was not enough to warrant action at this time. These CCMs suggested 
deferring the issue to WCPFC5 when the results of a new stock assessment for bigeye tuna 
will be available and further results of the IPDCP will have been reported.   
 
277. Mr Paul Dalzell (USA) and Mr Augustine Mobiha (PNG) co-chaired a working group 
aimed at reaching consensus on a draft CMM to supplement CMM-2005-01 and CMM-2006-
01 on bigeye and yellowfin tuna in the WCPO. After several rounds of discussion, the chairs 
produced WPCFC4-2007/27 (Rev.4) as a co-chair’s summary of the output of the working 
group. The working group could not reach agreement on the terms of FAD closures, 
specifically whether the closure should be one or three months and at a fixed or flexible time. 
There were also a number of exemptions proposed, including Philippine purse seiners 
operating on the high seas and small domestic vessels (< 50 m) in FFA member countries. In 
terms of bigeye tuna catch reductions in longline fisheries, a number of options for exempting 
fisheries with relatively smaller catches were discussed. The Chair noted that considerable 
additional work will be required during the coming year to support efforts at WCPFC5 to 
adopt a suitable CMM for reducing bigeye and yellowfin tuna catches.  
 
278. Japan presented the results of two research projects related to the reduction of juvenile 
bigeye and yellowfin tuna mortality in purse-seine fisheries (WCPCF4-2007/DP17 [rev. 2]). 
Although the research showed no significant relationship between bigeye catches and the 
depth of the underwater structure of FADs, using large sized mesh (> 300 mm) in part of the 
body of nets in the tropical WCPO was suggested as a means of reducing mortality of 
juvenile bigeye tuna. Japan also noted that since its purse seiners spend a greater amount of 
time in transit to fishing grounds, its effort is effectively only 60–70% that of other fleets.   
 
279. Dr Hampton prepared a paper to assist the working group in evaluating management 
options. In SPC-OFP’s view, a one-month FAD closure would lead to little, if any, reduction 
in fishing mortality of juvenile yellowfin and bigeye tuna because vessels would probably be 
able to coincide such a closure with routine downtime related to unloading and/or vessel 
maintenance.  
 
280. Some CCMs noted that information in the form provided by Dr Hampton was very 
useful to the Commission and requested that the information be passed to the SC for review, 
and that the SC should provide similar analysis on relevant management options next year.   
 
281. Supported by China and Australia, French Polynesia suggested a compromise position 
of a two-month FAD closure. Japan, Korea and Chinese Taipei supported a one-month FAD 
closure.  Most FFA-member CCMs and the EC supported a three-month FAD closure. 
 
282. The USA stated that any measures proposed must be enforceable under current MCS 
measures. It cited the example of IATTC catch retention measures that show less than 40% 
compliance even under conditions of 100% observer coverage.   
 
38 
 
283.   Recognizing the failure of WCPFC4 to adopt a measure to address concerns relating 
to overfishing of bigeye and yellowfin tuna, particularly in relation to purse-seine fishing on 
FADs as agreed on at WCPFC3 in December 2006, the Commission agreed that, at its 
meeting in December 2008, it would adopt a supplementary and/or revised CMM for bigeye 
and yellowfin tuna. 
 
284.  The CMM will be based upon the most recent scientific advice. The Chair stated that 
future or pending scientific studies will not be used as an excuse to delay the adoption of the 
measure. The CMM must have the potential to deliver tangible results in terms of an 
improvement in the status of the WCPO stocks of bigeye and yellowfin.     
 
285. The CMM will apply to purse seining, longlining and other commercial fisheries that 
catch yellowfin and bigeye tuna in the Convention Area. 
 
286. The Commission tasked the Fourth Regular Sessions of the SC and TCC to provide 
advice and recommendations that will support the development of the CMM.   
 
287.   The advice and recommendations will, inter alia, include consideration of the status 
of stocks, the potential for technological solutions to maximize the selectivity of fishing gear 
for juvenile yellowfin and bigeye tuna while minimizing the impact on the skipjack fishery, 
fairness and equity and enforceability including the status of the implementation of MCS 
measures in the Commission, particularly the ROP and VMS.   
 
288. The Commission committed to the implementation of the ROP and VMS during 2008 
as critical elements that are required to support the implementation of the new measure. In 
preparation for the implementation of this measure in 2009, CCMs will implement these 
measures in their purse seine and longline fleets during 2008. 
 
289. The development of the draft CMM will include consultation with industry, 
particularly the WTPO, and will identify research currently being conducted that will 
improve our understanding of how to deal with this conservation challenge. 
 
290. The Commission called on CCMs to take voluntary steps to mitigate the impact of 
their fishing activities on the sustainability of bigeye and yellowfin tuna and to report back on 
steps taken, as part of their Part 2 Annual Reports 
 
CMM for the  implementation of the Regional Observer Programme 
 
291. A small working group, convened by Dr Karnella during WCPFC4, produced 
WCPFC4-2007/23 (Rev.2), which proposes a framework for implementing the ROP. 
Implementation is based on the use of existing regional, sub-regional and national 
programmes already operational in the region when the CMM enters into force on 15 
February 2008, and provides for gradual development of the programme through 2012. The 
minimum size of vessels requiring an observer, as well as other operational aspects of the 
ROP, was deferred for consideration under the intersessional working group (IWG)-ROP and 
its recommendation to the Commission on this matter in 2008.   
 
292. This outcome, along with a slightly amended version of the measure forwarded from 
TCC3, was adopted by the Commission as a new CMM for the ROP, CMM-2007-01 
(Attachment K).  
 
39 
 
Amendments to the CMM for the Commission Vessel Monitoring System  
(CMM-2006-06) 
 
293. Pursuant to a concern raised at TCC3 (TCC3 Summary Report, para 50), the USA 
proposed an amendment to CMM-2006-06, requiring that vessels in the Convention Area be 
required to maintain VMS transmission when they move into the part of the Convention Area 
bounded by 20oN and 175oE (the area for which a VMS implementation date has yet to be 
established) from elsewhere in the Convention Area (WCPFC4-2007/DP31). Japan expressed 
support for the USA’s amendment. The revised measure is appended as Attachment L. 
 
294. The Commission adopted the amendment as contained in WCPFC4-2007/DP31. It was 
accepted that CMM-2006-06 would be revised to reflect this amendment. The Commission 
noted that the NC is responsible for developing proposals for VMS implementation in the 
area north of 20oN and west of 175oE.   
 
New CMM for a catch documentation scheme 
 
295. A small working group, convened by Mr Wez Norris (Australia) during WCPFC4, 
developed terms of reference for an intersessional working group to examine the idea of a 
CDS for fisheries in the Convention Area.  Divergent opinions were expressed by CCMs 
participating in the small working group. These opinions ranged from strong support to 
doubts about the practicality of a CDS and about CCM capabilities to cope with the increased 
workload a CDS would impose. The Commission was not able to adopt terms of reference for 
this work during WCPFC4. 
 
296. The EC, noting its experience with CDS issues in this and other RFMO forums (e.g. 
see WCPFC4-2007/DP24), volunteered to lead an intersessional working group (operating 
electronically) to work toward designing an appropriate CDS for the region that focuses on 
the most critical species. This intersessional working group will operate independently from 
the TCC in order to reduce the TCC’s workload. The report of the working group will be 
tabled at TCC4 for review, possible refinement, and adopting for forwarding to WCPFC5.   
 
New CMM(s) for Record of Fishing Vessels and Authorization to Fish 
 
297. Following TCC3’s recommendations regarding 1) whether or not (and how) to allow 
the operation of non-CCM flagged carrier and bunker vessels on the high seas in the 
Convention Area (TCC3 Summary Report, paras 151–153), and 2) tracking the 
active/inactive status of vessels on the Record of Fishing Vessels (TCC3 Summary Report, 
para 138), a small working group was convened at WCPFC4 under the leadership of Mr 
Norris. This small working group considered a proposal on the second issue by Australia 
(WCPFC4-2007/DP04) and a proposal on the first issue by RMI (WCPFC4-2007/DP09). The 
report of the small group is appended as Attachment M.   
 
298. RMI explained that many of the bunker and carrier vessels in its waters are flagged to 
non-CCMs. This was the basis for their proposal to amend CMM 2004-01 so as to allow the 
operation of such vessels and to do so through establishment of a separate registry for 
bunkers and carriers flagged to non-CCMs. This would in effect make the temporary register 
of carrier and bunker vessels a permanent register.   
 
 
40 
299. Australia’s proposal would call for a list of each CCM’s active fishing vessels to be 
submitted each July, based on the previous year’s data. Its proposal would also provide for 
information to be submitted on the number of days fished by each vessel, with the purpose of 
facilitating the evaluation of CMMs.   
 
300. The Commission adopted the following recommendations of the small working group: 
a. The Commission should defer consideration of establishing a record of non-
CCM carrier and bunker vessels. 
b. The Commission should refer the original proposal from RMI, as amended in 
paragraphs 1(c), 1(d), 11–16, and 19–22 of WCPFC4-2007/28 should be 
referred to TCC4 for consideration. 
c. The Commission should encourage interested CCMs to work together before 
TCC4 to continue to develop this measure for adoption in 2008. 
d. The Commission should extend the current exemption for non-CCM carrier 
and bunker vessels for 2008 pending the work recommended above. 
e. Before 1 July of each year, each Commission Member shall submit to the 
Executive Director a list of all vessels that appeared in its record of fishing 
vessels at any time during the preceding calendar year, together with each 
vessel’s registration number, the WCPFC identification number (WIN), and 
an indication of whether each vessel fished for highly migratory fish stocks 
in the Convention Area beyond its area of national jurisdiction. The 
indication shall be expressed as (a) fished, or (b) did not fish. 
f. Members that operate joint-venture or charter arrangements that result in data 
reporting obligations being conferred to a party other than the flag State will 
make arrangements to ensure that the flag State can meet its obligations 
under para 300(e). 
g. The WCPFC Record of Active Fishing Vessels shall identify those fishing 
vessels so listed that were active in the Convention Area in the preceding 
year, consistent with the information provided by Members under para 
300(e).  
h. The Executive Director shall use available information, including the 
information supplied by Members under para 300(e) to assist in the 
assessment of the implementation of relevant CMMs and resolutions for the 
annual consideration of the TCC.   
 
301. The Commission noted that some CCMs will not be able to provide full information in 
2008. 
 
302. The Commission noted a suggestion to establish a real-time active vessel list at some 
stage in the future as part of an integrated MCS package.   
 
New CMM for transhipment 
 
303. Following discussions under Agenda Item 6.1, proposals submitted by RMI, Australia 
and  Japan were considered as the basis for a consolidated proposal by a small working group 
during WCPFC4.   
 
304. After several meetings, the small working group on transhipment agreed that further 
progress on a measure at WCPFC4 would not be possible. The group recommended that an 
intersessional working group that meets electronically, be established. The intersessional 
 
41 
working group may consider the following issues, noting the requirements under Convention 
Article 29:  
a. identifying characteristics of fisheries engaged in transhipment in the 
WCPFC Convention Area as called for in Article 29(4); 
b. identifying areas of application to which procedures allowing and regulating 
transhipment under Article 29(3) would apply, taking into account the 
characteristics identified above; 
c. developing procedures to obtain and verify data on the quantity and species 
transhipped, both in port and at sea in the Convention Area (including 
reviewing the current Annual Report template if necessary); 
d. developing further procedures to determine when transhipment covered by 
this Convention has been completed; and 
e. developing guidelines to be applied if CCMs choose to designate ports for  
transhipment.   
 
Revision of CMM on IUU Vessel List (CMM-2006-09) 
 
305. Papers relating to the amendment of the current CMM on establishing an IUU Vessel 
List were submitted by the USA (WCPFC4-2007/DP15), Korea (WCPFC4-2007/DP16) and 
Chinese Taipei (WCPFC-2007/DP19). The USA proposal, which contains draft text for a 
revised CMM, was tabled at TCC3 where it was agreed that discussions should continue 
through an intersessional working group and the USA would bring a revised proposal to 
WCPFC4.   
 
306. Korea’s proposal sought to remove a provision contained in CMM-2006-09, which 
calls for the description of IUU activities to include vessels that “are under the control of the 
owner of any vessel on the WCPFC IUU Vessel List”. Korea pointed out that para 3j is not a 
relevant example of IUU fishing activities as defined in the FAO’s International Plan of 
Action on IUU fishing, and that other RFMOs other than IATTC and South East Atlantic 
Fisheries Organisation (SEAFO) have not adopted such a provision. Korea also stated that the 
level of sanction on the owner of the vessel on the WCPFC IUU Vessel List should be 
decided by flag States themselves, not the Commission.   
 
307. Dr Tsamenyi clarified that this provision is not contained in the IPOA-IUU, which 
focuses on vessel activity rather than on the owner of the vessel. Dr Tsamenyi also noted that 
the inclusion of the provision is a policy issue for Members, which has to be considered in 
terms of domestic legal and constitutional requirements rather than international law. Korea 
asked if it would be more precise to use the word “defined” as opposed to “described”, as 
proposed by the USA, in reference to the use of the phrase “as described in the IPOA on IUU 
fishing”. Dr Tsamenyi explained that since FAO’s IPOA on IUU does not define IUU 
fishing, but simply “refers” to a list of activities that may constitute IUU fishing, it is more 
appropriate to use the term “described”, as is the case with CMM-2006-09.   
 
308. Chinese Taipei proposed three points for consideration in the new CMM: 
a. Reversion to the term “evidence”, rather than “suitably documented 
information”; 
b. Provision for IUU fishing incidents that have been settled to the satisfaction 
of the involved CCMs to be excluded from the draft list; 
c. Provision for a requirement that inclusion in the IUU Vessel List cannot 
occur without there having been notification to the flag State prior to its 
submission to the Secretariat for inclusion on the draft list.   
 
42 
 
309. In discussion, the EC raised comments concerning the role of the Commission’s 
Executive Director in the listing process; provisions for port State measures; procedures to be 
followed if the flag State is not notified of the incident; and mutual recognition of IUU lists of 
other RFMOs. 
 
310. A small working group, convened under the leadership of Ms Koehler produced a 
further revision to CMM-2006-09 WCPFC4-2007/DP15 (Rev.2).  This document embodies 
some points of agreement reached during WCPFC4 but does not represent consensus on other 
points, inter alia, the provision to extend the list to other vessels of the same owner 
(paragraph 3j) amendments to paragraph 22 regarding measures to be taken by CCMs and 
mutual recognition of IUU lists of other RFMOs.   
 
311. The Commission agreed to adopt WCPFC4-2007/DP15 (Rev.2) as a revised measure, 
CMM-2007-03, which will replace the current text of CMM 2006-09 in its entirety 
(Attachment N).  The Commission also agreed to defer discussion on other proposed 
amendments on which consensus had not been reached, including the amendment proposed 
by Korea in relation to paragraph 3j and the proposal by the EC for mutual recognition of 
IUU lists of other RFMOs, to the next meeting. 
 
312. In relation to issues raised in respect of paragraph 3j, the Commission agreed to task 
Dr Tsamenyi with preparing a paper on the issues of beneficial ownership and IUU for 
consideration by WCPFC5. Korea, Japan, and the USA indicated that they wished to revisit 
next year (at TCC4) some of the issues that could not be resolved. 
 
313. New Zealand stated its intention to work with FFA members to draft a CMM — for the 
control of nationals — for TCC4’s consideration, and welcomed contributions from other 
interested CCMs in this regard.    
 
Revision of CMM on Mitigating the Impact of Fishing on Seabirds (CMM-2007-03) 
 
314. The USA led a small drafting group to amend CMM-2006-02 to reflect the new 
minimum technical specifications produced by a small working group (WCPFC4-2007/24). 
The amended CMM was tabled as WCPFC4-2007/24 (Rev.2).   
 
315. In response to a question from the EC regarding the scientific rigor of the 
specifications, the USA explained that the specifications were developed with input from 
BirdLife International, and that the CMM will be reviewed annually, and that further work on 
fishery–seabird interactions is proposed under the SC’s 2008 work programme.   
 
316. In response to a question from the Chair, ACAP expressed support for the measure, on 
the basis that CCMs worked together to further test some aspects.   
 
317. The Commission adopted the revised CMM for mitigating the impact of fishing on 
seabirds as CMM-2007-03 (Attachment O).   
 
New CMM on the aspirations of small island developing States 
 
318. RMI introduced WCPFC4-2007-DP07, which calls on the Commission to develop and 
implement measures supporting fishery development in SIDS, while recognizing the 
principles contained in Resolution 2005-02. In addition, developed CCMs were requested to 
 
43 
reduce or restructure their fleets to accommodate the aspirations of SIDS. RMI advised that 
while it was receptive to suggestions to refine its proposal, it was past the time for the 
Commission to honor the rhetoric of supporting fisheries development in SIDS CCMs, 
support the provisions of the CMMs that have been adopted without prejudice to the 
legitimate rights and obligations of coastal States in relation to the development of their 
fisheries, and develop a clear strategy to support SIDS in their individual and collective 
development aspirations. RMI recalled the Vava’u Declaration on Pacific Fisheries Resources 
agreed at the recent meeting of Pacific Islands Forum Leaders in Tonga, which while 
recognizing the need for Pacific Islands to become more proactive in promoting sustainable 
development of Pacific tuna fisheries, also committed Forum Island countries to further 
strengthening the WCPFC’s CMMs. RMI further stated their disappointment in that the 
Commission is considering new applicants, which will ultimately add capacity into the 
region, and that this is supported by Members who have not supported the Marshall Islands 
and Tuvalu in their pursuit of fishery development. RMI raised further concerns of fairness 
and priority, as it felt left behind on its issue of fishery development (SIDS aspirations), as a 
founding Member of the Commission, while the Commission deliberates upon and 
contemplates accommodating applications of new entrants. RMI, in submitting its draft 
resolution, sought clarification of the Commission’s interpretation of the intent of Resolution 
2005-02 (para 2), CMM-2005-01 (para 6) and CMM-2005-01 (paras 7–10) with regards to 
the development aspirations of SIDS as partially reflected in the Summary Record of 
WCPFC3 at para 88. 
 
319. In relation to Resolution-2005-02, para 2:  
Paragraph 1 above shall be implemented to ensure that no adverse effect is given to 
the coastal processing and transhipment facilities and associated vessels of 
developing island coastal states and territories, and would not affect investment that 
has occurred legally in FFA member countries, and  
 
CMM-2005-01, para. 6: 
Nothing in this decision shall prejudice the legitimate rights and obligations of those 
small island state Members and participating territories in the Convention Area 
seeking to develop their own domestic fisheries.   
 
320. Dr Tsamenyi responded that the interpretation of these provisions is not a legal issue,  
rather CCMs should clarify what they intended these provisions to mean, including with 
respect to the definition of “domestic” fisheries. He noted that a number of resolutions were 
agreed on during PrepCon to address fleet capacity expansion in the period after 1999, and 
that these applied before the Commission was operational. CMM-2004-04, which was 
adopted at WCPFC1, acknowledges that all resolutions adopted during PrepCon would 
continue to apply until the Commission decided otherwise. He also noted that in accordance 
with the “Nomenclature Decision” taken at WCPFC2, CMM-2005-01 takes precedence over 
the Capacity Resolutions adopted by the Commission. The Chair further noted that, if the 
vessels that RMI and Tuvalu are seeking to import enter the fishery, then they would be 
administered under the Vessel Day Scheme as provided for at paragraphs 9 and 10 of CMM-
2005-01.  
 
321. Several FFA members expressed disappointment, saying that they felt discriminated 
against in efforts to pursue their fisheries development aspirations. They noted that while 
developed CCMs were expanding their fishing capacity, SIDS-CCMs were being constrained 
by the Commission’s interpretation of Resolution 2005-02 and domestic laws enacted by 
some Members. To further clarify, Chinese Taipei advised that the principles applied in its 
 
44 
domestic regulations on restrictions on the export of fishing vessels in force is not to increase 
capacity. The spirit of the regulations is intended to ensure that existing capacity not be 
increased.   
 
322. While acknowledging the efforts of Chinese Taipei to address these real threats to 
sustainable fisheries development and management, some CCMs advised that they did not 
want a recurrence of the capacity expansion experienced in the late 1990s and early 2000s. 
On the other hand, all FFA members, along with the EU and China, supported RMI’s draft 
proposal, in particular, SIDS’ aspirations to develop their fisheries.   
 
323. Dr Tsamenyi subsequently advised that he considered the intent of the provisions for 
developing SIDS members of the Commission in Resolution 2005-02 and CMM-2005-01 
was to protect Pacific Island domestic fisheries aspirations. Since these decisions, RMI and 
Tuvalu have applied to develop their fisheries as they understood was their right to do. These 
applications have been denied, which has caused great concern about the implications of their 
rights. One significant issue relates to para 7–10 of CMM-2005-01 and the implementation of 
the VDS. The VDS applies to purse-seine capacity in the EEZs of PNA Member CCMs. 
Further, the Commission is required to implement compatible measures on the high seas and 
in waters under the national jurisdiction of non-PNA CCMs to control total capacity and total 
fishing effort in the Convention Area. He stated that with the full implementation of the VDS 
from 1 December 2007, capacity can theoretically be managed to ensure that the provisions 
of CMM-2005-01, at least in respect to fishing effort in the national waters of PNA CCMs, 
can be fully met. This then frees the Commission to allow Tuvalu and RMI to manage their 
purse-seine fishing capacity under the VDS. If that is accepted, then it becomes an issue for 
Chinese Taipei whether it will permit export of the vessels to fish in these areas.   
 
324. RMI agreed fully with the analysis and interpretations in relation to the implementation 
of the VDS and the subsequent removal of restrictions on its acquisition of vessels. With the 
implementation of the VDS, the number of vessels is no longer relevant and, in the view of 
Tuvalu and RMI, the reasons for not permitting export of the vessels by Chinese Taipei are 
no longer valid. RMI stated that in order to achieve some economic independence and reduce 
the country’s reliance on foreign aid and development assistance, it was critical that the 
Commission support Marshall Islands’ efforts to develop its local tuna fisheries. The 
Commission’s developed CCMs cannot encourage SIDS such as RMI to develop its economy 
on one hand but then restrict its efforts to do that by placing unreasonable constraints on its 
ability to use the only economic resource it has, tuna.  Many FFA and non-FFA CCMs 
expressed support for this aspiration. Niue, in supporting RMI, expressed its grave concern of 
the applications of new entrants, particularly while CCMs’ support for SIDS is questioned. 
 
325.  Recalling the discussion at WCPFC3 in December 2006, which is reflected in para 88 
of WCPFC3’s Summary Record, WCPFC4 agreed that: 
a. in relation to para 2 of Resolution-2005-02 and para 6 of CMM-2005-01, the 
Commission confirmed the understanding of SIDS members that these provisions 
had been accepted by SIDS on the basis that the legitimate right of SIDS to develop 
their domestic fisheries was not constrained by these provisions;  
b. the VDS was now operational and that the VDS is the measure adopted by PNA 
members of the Commission for managing capacity and fishing effort in the EEZs of 
PNA members. It was agreed that the PNA would provide a report to the 
Commission on the implementation of the VDS at each annual session of the 
Commission; 
 
45 
c. in relation to the request by RMI and Tuvalu to acquire new boats for their domestic 
development, the overcapacity resolution, as it relates to purse-seine fishing effort in 
the waters of PNA members has to be interpreted and applied by reference to CMM-
2005-01, in particular the implementation of the VDS as provided for in CMM-2005-
01, and not the 1999, 2002 and 2005 capacity resolutions; 
d. the Executive Director will commence a process in early 2008 to support the 
implementation of similar measures to limit purse-seine effort on the high seas, 
consistent with para 9 of CMM 2005-01, and in waters under the national jurisdiction 
of non-PNA members of the Commission, consistent with para 10(ii) of CMM-2005-
01; and 
e. a consultation for CCMs to further discuss strategies for promoting the development 
aspirations of SIDS members of the Commission be organized for mid-2008 with the 
Chair to develop a suitable agenda intersessionally with CCMs.       
 
326. Tuvalu, on behalf of developing State CCMs, thanked the Commission for its 
understanding and noted its understanding that the resolution on overcapacity cannot be used 
as a tool for developed CCMs to obstruct developing State CCMs from acquiring new purse-
seine vessels. Tuvalu noted that as a result of the decision in relation to the development 
aspirations of SIDS at WCPFC4, efforts by RMI to have its two purse-seine vessels released 
by Chinese Taipei and the application from Tuvalu cannot be refused on the basis of the 
Resolution on Overcapacity (Resolution 2005-02). The Chair responded that it was his 
understanding that the issues for Tuvalu and RMI was resolved, and that this was 
subsequently reflected in para 325. Further, the Commission recognized the importance of 
SIDS development aspirations, and the need for sustainable management measures for the 
regional tuna stock. 
8.2 
Allocation 
327. The Executive Director presented WCPFC4-2007/14, which summarizes the history of 
consideration of the allocation issue by WCPFC. Two CCMs provided comments on a 
discussion paper presented at WCPFC3 (WCPFC3-2006/15) in 2007. WCPFC4 was invited 
to discuss options for further consideration of the allocation issue in the coming year.   
 
328. New Zealand stated that it felt holding an allocation workshop in 2008 would be 
premature.   
 
329. New Zealand, on behalf of FFA-member CCMs, stressed the critical nature of 
determining equitable allocation arrangements for the development of SIDS, for the 
implementation of effective CMMs and for economic security for all CCMs. However, given 
the other priority issues facing the SC, TCC and Commission, it has not been possible to 
undertake the work programme outlined in WCPFC3-2007/15. Nevertheless, these CCMs 
will certainly be working to advance this issue over the next year.   
 
330. Tuvalu echoed the points made by New Zealand, stating their expectation that the 
Commission will develop total allowable catch and effort limits for the high seas but will not 
prescribe allocations within EEZs.   
 
331. WCPFC4 agreed to retain allocation as an agenda item for next year’s meeting but 
noted it is not one of the top priority items for 2008. 
 
 
46 
AGENDA  ITEM  9  -  ANNUAL REPORT ON THE WORK OF THE COMMISSION 
 
332. The Executive Director presented WCPFC4-2007/15, which summarizes the work of 
the Commission during the past year.  He expressed his sincere appreciation to Bernard 
Thoulag and the staff from the National Oceanic Resource Management Authority 
(NORMA), FSM during the last 12 months for their support in establishing the Secretariat’s 
office in Pohnpei.   
 
333. The Chair congratulated the Executive Director on the excellent work of the Secretariat 
over the last year. He noted, in particular, the opening of the new Secretariat headquarters 
building at Pohnpei and reiterated a request for each CCM to consider furnishing a room in 
the headquarters building, using elements of their own national style.   
 
334. Canada, on behalf of other CCMs, thanked the People’s Republic of China for their 
significant contribution to the new headquarters building.   
 
AGENDA  ITEM  10  -  REPORT OF THE FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION 
COMMITTEE 
 
335. Mr Terry Toomata (Samoa), Co-Chair of the Finance and Administration Committee 
(FAC), presented FAC’s Summary Report (WCPFC4-2007/16) (Attachment P).  
 
336. The Chair acknowledged the cooperative nature of the discussion of budget issues at 
WCPFC4 and thanked all participants for their cooperation.   
 
337. Vanuatu noted, and the Commission confirmed, that its contribution has been received. 
 
338. WCPFC4 adopted all the recommendations of the FAC without refinement.   
 
AGENDA  ITEM  11  -  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS OF DEVELOPING STATES 
 
339. Noting that this is a standing agenda item, the Chair acknowledged a proposal put 
forward by RMI on this issue (WCPFC4-2007/DP07) as a positive step.   
 
340. Tokelau, on behalf of FFA, expressed appreciation for the Secretariat’s management of 
the Commission’s Special Requirements Fund, which allows for the continued participation 
of these States in the work of the Commission, and encouraged CCMs to contribute to this 
fund.   
 
341. The contributions of the USA and FSM to this fund were acknowledged with 
appreciation, along with the requirement for ongoing contributions to this fund.   
 
AGENDA  ITEM  12  -  COOPERATION WITH OTHER ORGANISATIONS 
 
342. The Executive Director presented a paper on the Commission’s efforts to date, and 
activities planned for 2008, to strengthen cooperation, consultation and collaboration with 
other RFMOs and relevant national and international organizations (WCPFC4-2007/18). The 
following items were raised for the Commission’s consideration: 
a. authorization of a schedule of work, defined through the work of SC3, FAC 
and WCPFC4 (see Agenda Items 4.4 and 10) to be offered to SPC-OFP as 
the provider of scientific services to the Commission; 
 
47 
b. advice and recommendations in relation to the development of a formal 
understanding for cooperation, consultation and collaboration with the UN 
FAO, the North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) and ICCAT; 
c. provide any additional appropriate advice and recommendations in respect of 
the relationship with IATTC; 
d. review, refine as considered necessary, and endorse the proposed 
memorandum of understanding (MoU) with FFA; 
e. review, refine as considered necessary, and endorse the proposed MoU with 
CCAMLR; 
f. review, refine as considered necessary, and endorse the proposed MoU with 
IOTC; 
g. review, refine as considered necessary, and endorse the proposed MoU with 
the ACAP; 
h. review, refine as considered necessary, and endorse the proposed MoU with 
the SPREP; and  
i. 
provide advice and recommendations in relation to the possible development 
of collaborative relations with other organisations or institutions. 
 
343. The Executive Director introduced a correction to para 15 of WCPFC4-2007/18, 
noting that the MoU with FFA has been signed by both parties. The priority items were 
identified as being the MoU with SPC; advice on the relationship with IATTC; progressing 
the MoU with CCAMLR upon receipt of comments on the draft MoU from CCAMLR; 
finalization of the MoU with ACAP; and adoption of the MoU with SPREP.   
 
344. Vanuatu, on behalf of FFA members, stressed the importance of data sharing, 
including data on vessels, vessel owners and management measures, as a critical component 
of cooperation with other organizations.   
 
345. Some CCMs stressed the importance of the relationship between WCPFC and IATTC, 
noting that the common boundary between the two RFMOs highlights issues of mutual 
interest such as authorization to fish and IUU fishing, potential double counting of catch, and 
the need for harmonized management frameworks.   
 
346. Chinese Taipei suggested that special provisions governing the co-location of the 
Commission’s VMS with the FFA’s VMS should be developed as an Annex to the MoU with 
FFA.   
 
347. The USA provided the following comments: 
a. MoUs with FAO, PICES and ICCAT should not be pursued formally given 
time constraints, but informal contact should be maintained; 
b. Opportunities to coordinate with the North Pacific Anadromous Fish 
Commission (NPAFC) should be considered given the interaction of these 
fisheries with albacore fisheries in the North Pacific;  
c. WCPFC should participate in a workshop being held by FAO next year on 
port State measures;  
d. WCPFC should be aware of, and strive to assist in, CCAMLR’s efforts to 
reduce seabird mortality by using CCAMLR’s measures as reference 
documents in SC and TCC deliberations, particularly where seabird species’ 
distributions overlap the Convention Areas of both the WCPFC and the 
CCAMLR.   
 
 
48 
348. New Zealand explained that its minor proposed amendments to the MoU with ACAP 
(WCPFC4-2007/18 Rev.1, Attachment H) are designed to re-cast the language of the 
document as an arrangement rather than an agreement (or MoU). This was necessary because 
WCPFC is entering into a non-legally binding relationship with ACAP.   
 
349. Australia noted the need for a special relationship not only with IATTC but also with 
IOTC due to a shared boundary in the WCPO. Support for assisting CCAMLR in seabird 
mortality reduction efforts was also expressed.   
 
350. Canada noted that it is hosting a tri-party workshop between NPAFC, WCPFC and 
North Pacific Coast Guard Forces in connection with the next meeting of the NPAFC in order 
to promote cooperation and effective use of resources.   
 
351. The Commission adopted the MoU with IOTC (WCPFC4-2007/18 Rev.1, Attachment 
G), the MoU with SPREP (WCPFC-2007/18 Rev. 1, Attachment I), and the MoU with ACAP 
as modified by New Zealand (WCPFC4-2007/18 Rev.1, Attachment H).   
 
AGENDA  ITEM  13  -  WORK PROGRAMME AND BUDGET FOR 2008 AND 
INDICATIVE WORK PROGRAMME AND BUDGET FOR 2009 AND 2010 
 
352. WCPFC4 adopted the recommendations of the FAC with regards to the 2008 work 
programme and budget as revised, and an indicative budget for 2009 and 2010. 
 
353. The Chair identified the priority issues for the Commission in 2008 as:   
a. development of a CMM for bigeye and yellowfin tuna; 
b. development of compatible measures for the high seas, including 
development of measures for the high seas and for EEZs of other non-PNA 
CCMs, which are compatible with those measures applicable to the PNA 
members of the Commission consistent with paras 9 and 10 of CMM-2005-
01; 
c. development of a CMM that regulates transhipment activities; and 
d. development of an improved and rationalized process for considering 
applications for CNM status. 
 
354. The EC suggested that development of a CDS be considered as a priority for the 
coming year. Japan expressed reservations on the priority of developing a CDS, although it 
noted its willingness to cooperate in discussion on this issue.   
 
355. The USA suggested that further measures to reduce sea turtle bycatch might also be 
considered a priority.  
 
AGENDA  ITEM  14  -  ELECTION OF OFFICERS 
 
356. WCPFC4 confirmed the election of Keith Bigelow (USA) as Vice-Chair of the SC; 
Wendell Sanford (Canada) as Chair of the TCC; Noan Pakop (PNG) as Vice-Chair of the 
TCC; Charles Karnella (USA) as chair of the Interim Working Group on the Regional 
Observer Programme; Masanori Miyahara (Japan) as Chair of the Northern Committee; Terry 
Toomata (Samoa) and Dean Swanson (USA) as Co-Chairs of the FAC.   
 
 
49 
AGENDA  ITEM  15  -  OTHER MATTERS 
 
15.1 Outcomes of the joint meeting of tuna RFMOs, Kobe, Japan, 22–26 January 2007 
 
357. The Executive Director noted a proposed meeting of the Chairs and Executive 
Directors of the tuna RFMOs to be held in the USA in early 2008.   
 
358. The USA and New Zealand encouraged the Commission to continue to progress on 
key issues identified as priorities in the course of action recommended by the Kobe meeting.   
 
359. WCPFC4 adopted the proposed roadmap developed by the Kobe meeting and agreed 
to cooperate with other RFMOs toward standardization of performance reviews.  
15.2 Proposed performance reviews of tuna RFMOs 
360. Australia proposed that the WCPFC undertake a performance review consistent with 
the recommendations of the Kobe meeting, and offered specific guidance on the issue in 
WCPFC4-2007/DP05.   
 
361. Japan agreed that the performance review is important, but suggested it be postponed 
until 2009 due to a lack of time to fully consider the issue. In this way, the results of the 
science structure review to be conducted in 2008 can be incorporated into the broader Kobe 
review in 2009.   
 
362. The Commission agreed to defer further consideration of the WCPFC performance 
review to WCPFC5.   
15.3 Other issues 
363. The USA noted recent positive developments at the United Nations regarding shark 
conservation and management. In informal consultations to negotiate the annual United 
Nations general Assembly (UNGA) Sustainable Fisheries Resolution this year, participating 
States agreed by consensus to new text that includes strong calls to States and RFMOs, such 
as the WCPFC, to adopt measures to manage both directed and non-directed shark fisheries, 
and, where scientific information is uncertain or inadequate, not increasing fishing effort in 
directed shark fisheries until conservation and management measures have been established. 
In addition, the resolution calls for concerted action to improve the implementation of and 
compliance with existing RFMOs and national measures that regulate shark fisheries. 
 
364. The USA also highlighted the problems of marine debris and derelict fishing gear 
(WCPFC4-2007/IP11), and suggested that this issue should be considered in future by the 
WCPFC.  
  
365. The Chair raised the issue of unregulated drift net fishing in the North Pacific in the 
areas fished under the NPAFC. Robert Martinolich, Chair of NPAFC’s Enforcement 
Committee noted that illegal drift netting occurs in the area but that there is no real link 
between these activities and tuna. Some of the apprehended vessels were found with albacore 
comprising up to 3% of their catch onboard although their main target was squid.   
 
 
50 
366. The Chair tasked the TCC with looking into a possible connection between illegal drift 
netting and impacts on northern stocks of albacore, and providing a report to WCPFC5 on the 
matter.   
 
AGENDA  ITEM  16  -  NEXT MEETING 
 
367. Korea offered to host WCPFC5 in Busan from 8–12 December 2008.   
 
368. Guam thanked the Commission for choosing Guam as the venue for WCPFC4 and 
offered its support for future meetings.  
 
369. The EC expressed its concern that meetings of the Commission and its committees and 
working groups be coordinated and rationalized with meetings of other RFMOs.   
 
AGENDA  ITEM  17  -  SUMMARY REPORT 
 
370. A draft version of the WCPFC4 Summary Report was prepared by the rapporteur and 
finalized by the Secretariat. It was circulated to CCMs for comment on 14 December 2007.  
After the 30-day comment period elapsed, comments were incorporated into the WCPFC4 
Summary Report and finalized and posted on WCPFC’s website on 18 February 2008. 
   
AGENDA  ITEM  18  -  CLOSE OF MEETING 
 
371. The Executive Director thanked all of the staff who supported the smooth running of 
the meeting, including the Governor and Vice-Governor of Guam, John Calvo of the Western 
Pacific Regional Fisheries Management Council office at Guam, Guam-based volunteer 
support staff, and staff of the Hyatt Regency Guam. Manny Duenas of the Guam Fishermen’s 
Cooperative Association graciously hosted nightly hospitality functions throughout the 
meeting. Emmanuel Schneiter (SPC) was acknowledged for his work on the Commission’s 
website, and Secretariat staff, Shelley Clarke, Iain Hayes and Martin Tsamenyi were thanked 
for their efforts.   
 
372. RMI thanked the Commission for its assistance in resolving issues associated with 
SIDS but expressed its disappointment that more progress was not made on other CMMs.   
 
373. New Zealand, on behalf of FFA-member CCMs, acknowledged progress made by the 
working groups on the ROP and the VMS, but regretted the failure of the Commission to 
agree on more effective management measures for critical fish stocks. These CCMs promised 
to advance the issues of allocation and MCS issues over the coming year.   
 
374. The Chair closed WCPFC4 at 18:45 on Friday, 7 December 2007.  
 
