Commission for the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the 
Western and Central Pacific Ocean 
 
Seventh Regular Session 
 
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA 
6–10 December 2010 
 
SUMMARY REPORT
 
AGENDA  ITEM  1  -  OPENING OF MEETING 
1. The Seventh Regular Session of the Commission for the Conservation and Management of 
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPFC7) took place 
from 6–10 December 2010 at Honolulu, Hawaii, USA.  The session was opened by the Chairman 
of the WCPFC, Ambassador Satya Nandan (Fiji).   
2. Dr Charles Karnella warmly welcomed participants to Hawaii and the seventh session of the 
Commission and expressed his wishes for a productive and enjoyable meeting.  His statement is 
appended as Attachment A. The pre-recorded speech by Senator Daniel Inouye (Hawaii) on the 
importance of fish and the Commission to the Pacific was received by all, and the Chairman 
expressed the Commission’s thanks to Senator Inouye. 
3. The WPCFC Chair thanked the people of Hawaii, and the government of the USA, for their 
welcome and providing the venue for the meeting. He noted the support of Senator Daniel Inouye 
for the work of the Commission, and acknowledged the work done by Kitty Simonds and the 
WPRFMC to organize the meeting and provide the facilities. He observed that the return to 
Hawaii was significant, and marked 10 years since the signing of the Convention. His statement 
is appended as Attachment B. 
4. The following Members attended:  Australia, Canada, People’s Republic of China, Cook 
Islands, European Union (EU), Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), Fiji, France, Japan, 
Kiribati, Korea, Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI), Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Palau, 
Papua New Guinea (PNG), Philippines, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Chinese Taipei, Tonga, Tuvalu, 
United States of America and Vanuatu.   
5. The following Participating Territories attended: American Samoa, Commonwealth of the 
Northern Mariana Islands, French Polynesia, Guam, New Caledonia, and Tokelau. 
6. Belize, Ecuador, El Salvador, Indonesia, Senegal, and Vietnam participated as Cooperating 
Non-Members (CNM).   
7. Thailand participated as an observer.   
8. The following intergovernmental organizations attended as formal observers to the meeting:  
Inter- American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC), International Commission for the 
Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT), International Scientific Committee for Tunas and 
6 
 
Tuna-like Species in the North Pacific Ocean (ISC), Northern Pacific Anadromous Fisheries 
Commission, Organization for Promotion of Responsible Tuna Fisheries (OPRT), Pacific Islands 
Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA), Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat, Parties to the Nauru 
Agreement (PNA), the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) and the World Bank.   
9. Observers from the following non-governmental organizations attended:  Agreement on the 
Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP), American Fishermen’s Research Foundation 
(AFRF), Birdlife International, Greenpeace, Hawaii Longline Association, International 
Sustainable Seafood Foundation (ISSF), International Union for the Conservation of Nature 
(IUCN), Marine Stewardship Council (MSC), Pacific Island Tuna Industry Association, Pew 
Charitable Trusts, Sea Turtle Restoration Project, Shark Advocates International, the World Tuna 
Purse Seine Organization (WTPO), and World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).   
10. A full list of participants is provided in (Attachment C).   
1.1 Chair’s Statement 
11. The Chairman made an opening statement (Attachment D).  
1.2 Adoption of agenda 
12. The agenda (WCPFC7-2010-02 (Rev. 1)) and associated programme of work (WCPFC-2010-
04) were adopted (Attachment E).   
1.3 Meeting arrangements 
13. The WCPFC Executive Director, Glenn Hurry, reviewed the administrative arrangements and 
meeting schedule. Secretariat technical staff attending the meeting including Donald David, ROP 
Data Quality Officer, Glenn Jano, Compliance Officer; Lucille Martinez, Executive Assistant; 
Herolyn Movick, Office Manager; Peter Flewwelling, Compliance Manager; Ken Smithson, 
Finance and Administrative Manager; Dr SungKwon Soh, Science Manager; Karl Staisch, 
Observer Programme Coordinator, and Sam Taufao, IT Manager. In addition to Secretariat staff, 
Dr Martin Tsamenyi served as the WCPFC Legal Advisor, Mark Smaalders as the Rapporteur 
and Dr Ziro Suzuki represented the Japanese Trust Fund which is administered by the Secretariat.  
1.4 Action Items from WCPFC6 
14. The Executive Director indicated that most action items had been addressed, and that any 
exceptions would be noted and addressed during the course of the meeting. 
15. FSM, on behalf of FFA members, commented on para. 384 in the WCPFC6 report, which 
relates to the Commission noting that the WCPFC and ISC MOU is to be reviewed at WCPFC7.  
On behalf of FFA members, they requested an opportunity to discuss the review of the WCPFC 
and ISC MOU, during agenda item 3.4.1 dealing with Cooperation with other organisations, and 
specifically when WP12 is considered.   
16. Palau commented on behalf of FFA members regarding paragraph 395 in the WCPFC6 report, 
and specifically on access to Commission VMS information under Article 24(8), which FFA 
members continue to support; they indicated they would elaborate on this point later in the week.   
17. Nauru commented on behalf of FFA members regarding paragraph 391 in the WCPFC6 
report, and specifically on the responses to the Chairs priorities. Regarding SC6 priorities, FFA 
members drew CCM’s attention to the North Pacific striped marlin proposal from FFA members 
(WCPFC7-2010-DP-07). Regarding data gaps, they noted that there were constructive 
discussions during SC6 and TCC6 regarding data gaps and encouraging CCMs to fulfill their 
commitments and obligations to provide data, which are reflected in the strong recommendations 
in the TCC6 report encouraging CCMs to fulfill their obligations to provide data; they expressed 
the hope that the Commission would consider these positively. Regarding TCC6 priorities, FFA 
7 
 
members proposed to establish a working group and TORs on a Catch Documentation Scheme 
(WCPFC7-2010-DP-18). 
AGENDA  ITEM  2  -  MEMBERSHIP 
2.1 
Status of the Convention 
18. New Zealand, as the depository of the Convention, reported that no instrument of ratification 
or accession to the Convention had been received since WCFPC6 (WCPFC7-2010-08).  It noted 
that on (i) 28 January 2010, the General Secretariat of the Council of the European Union advised 
that, as of 1 December 2009, the European Community has been replaced and succeeded by the 
European Union in respect of the Convention; and (ii) on 7 February 2010, the then-WCPFC 
Executive Director, on behalf of New Zealand as depositary, circulated notification of several 
corrections to the date of entry into force of the Convention for countries whose ratification or 
accession date fell within a calendar month that contains 31 days.  
19. Fiji thanked New Zealand for the update and requested clarification from Indonesia on the 
status of its internal ratification process. 
20. In a response to an inquiry Indonesia provided an update on the status of its internal 
Convention verification process. Indonesia confirmed their interest in becoming a member of the 
Commission and asked that the Legal Advisor visit to discuss the legal details and requirements 
with Indonesian officials. 
21. Samoa requested clarification of the effective date of entry into force for parties to the 
Convention, noting apparent discrepancies between the effective date and the date of ratification 
among some CCMs. It was noted by the Chair that the Convention enters into force for parties 30 
days after deposit of their articles of accession; New Zealand indicated it would investigate and 
provide clarification direct to Samoa. 
2.2 
Applications for Observer Status 
22. The Executive Director stated that the Secretariat had received eight applications for observer 
status. He advised that the following additions were made to the list of observers to the 
Commission: (i) Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea (DPRK), Thailand, and Panama (all 
included for 2010 in accordance with their request to become a CNM); (ii) the Parties to the 
Nauru Agreement and the World Bank (both (included under their status as intergovernmental 
organisations); and (iii) Shark Advocates International, Hawaii Longline Association, and 
Environment Hawai’i (all were accepted as NGOs, following no receipt of objection from 
members within 20 days before the start of the session).  
23. Samoa inquired how future media accreditation was to be handled, given that Korea 
Munhawa TV Broadcasting Corporation (MBC) had been given special permission to film during 
some sessions of WCPFC7. 
24. The Chair noted that under the Commission’s rules of procedure all meetings are open. Press 
representatives are asked to register. Problems may arise if media activities (e.g. taking photos or 
filming) disturbs the proceedings, but all meetings are open unless the Commission decides 
otherwise. 
25. Kiribati spoke on behalf of FFA members, noting that they had previously submitted that 
observers should pay to participate in meetings of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies, and 
that at WCPFC6 the FAC was invited to advise the Commission on the appropriateness and, if 
necessary, the level of observer registration fees in recognition of the growing number of 
observers and the costs incurred in catering for them at Commission meetings. FFA members also 
noted that the observer contribution scheme is included in the TOR of the Cost Recovery Study, 
8 
 
and that they look forward to working with other delegations on the appropriateness of the 
observer financial contribution, the categories of observers to which the contribution would apply 
and the respective amount(s). 
26. WCPFC7 noted the revised list of observers as presented by the Secretariat, and tasked 
the Secretariat with developing a proposal for media access.  
2.3 
Applications for cooperating non-member status 
27. Ten applications for CNM status were received by TCC6 for review, including renewal of 
status by Belize, Ecuador, El Salvador, Indonesia, Mexico, Senegal, and Vietnam and new 
applications for CNM status from Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Panama, and the 
Thailand; all except for Panama were considered by TCC6 in accordance with procedures 
specified in CMM 2009-11. The ED noted that all CNM applications, except that of Panama, 
were endorsed by TCC6 to the Commission subject to provision of additional data required by 
CMM 2009-11, as detailed in WCPFC7-010-10. The Secretariat received responses from 5; those 
responses were posted on the WCPFC website. The application from Panama was lodged in 
Spanish originally, but was subsequently lodged in English (following a communication from the 
Secretariat at the direction of TCC6); there was no recommendation from TCC on how to proceed 
regarding Panama’s initial (Spanish) application.  
28. Dr John Hampton (SPC Oceanic Fisheries Programme Manager) stated that the responses 
from CNM applicants indicate that they had provided most of the data that they could; many of 
the data gaps identified by TCC during its review occurred before the CNM applicants had 
comprehensive data collection mechanisms in place. 
29. Several CCMs spoke on behalf of FFA members regarding their expectations of all CNM 
applicants, indicating that Paragraph 2 of CMM 2009-11 lists the expectations agreed to by the 
Commission for CNM applications. FFA members stressed that CMM 2009-11 clearly states that 
all applications should include commitments regarding high seas boarding and inspection 
acceptance and making a financial contribution similar to that made by members; if some of the 
explicit commitments that WCPFC has requested be provided are missing, the application is 
incomplete. It was further noted that fairness required that all participants in the fishery share in 
the costs of management and conserving the stocks. FFA members referenced working paper 
FAC4/14, which proposed a unique level of contributions for each CNM that reflects their 
circumstances, and is in general comparable to the contribution by the smallest Pacific Island 
members. FFA members noted that determining participatory rights for CNMs should be 
considered on a case-by-case basis for CNM applicants, in accordance with CMM 2009-11(12). 
They stressed that such determination was without prejudice to the sovereign rights of coastal 
States, and that limits placed on CNMs could not be used to constrain the domestic development 
of PICTs (CNMs represent development partners for many PICTs, and the Commission should 
not have a role in determining the nature of any bilateral relationship). 
30. The EU agreed that CNM applicants should respect the reporting requirements, while 
cautioning that requiring an excessive financial contribution from developing states could 
discourage their participation as CNMs. The EU underlined that RFMOs should be open to all 
those states that have stakes in the relevant fishery. 
31. The Commission determined that, in accordance with provisions of the WCPF 
Convention and CMM 2005-2, CMM 2005-3, CMM 2006-04, CMM 2008-01 and CMM 
2009-11, the following conditions apply to the participatory rights granted to all 
Cooperating Non-Members (CNMs) for fisheries in the high seas within the Convention 
Area:  
i. 
All vessels will be equipped with the Commission’s vessel monitoring system (VMS), 
which shall be operational at all times while the vessels are in the Convention Area.  
9 
 
ii. 
The CNMs identified below (in paras 31–60) provide assurances that they will 
comply with all requests from Commission Members for information and 
documentation to investigate cases of possible illegal fishing.  
iii. 
In addition, unless otherwise specified below, CNMs may fish in waters under the 
national jurisdiction of other CCMs, in accordance with appropriate bilateral 
arrangements. Such CNMs shall ensure vessels flying their flags comply with all 
provisions of the WCPF Convention and WCPFC CMMs. In addition, such CNM 
vessels will be placed on the WCPFC Record of Fishing Vessels (WCPFC RFV). 
CCMs shall ensure that CNM fishing activities that are conducted in waters under 
their national jurisdiction in accordance with bilateral arrangements are consistent 
with all relevant CMMs and provisions of the WCPF Convention. Renewal of CNM 
status by the Commission will be conditional on full compliance with the national 
laws and regulations of any licensing CCM, all CMMs and provisions of the WCPF 
Convention. CCMs shall identify any violations by vessels flagged to a CNM and 
report on any investigations of such violations to the TCC. 
32. WCPFC7 approved the application for renewal of CNM status by Belize with the 
following participatory rights:   
Belize 
Catches of bigeye tuna from Belize are limited to 803.25 mt, its average catch levels over 
the period of 2001–2004; catches of yellowfin tuna are limited to 2,000 mt; and its 
fishing activities are limited to:  
a. Under CMM 2005-02 in accordance with paragraph 1, Belize is limited to the 
historical catch level for 2004 of two unique longliners in the Convention Area south of 
20 degrees south latitude;  
b. Under CMM 2005-03 Belize is limited to the 2005 level of five unique longliners in 
the Convention Area north of the equator; and  
c. Under CMM 2006-04, Belize is limited to two unique longliners in the Convention 
Area south of 15 degrees south latitude.  
33. Korea indicated that DPRK’s participation and cooperation as a CNM could be seen to have 
some positive aspects, with respect to transparency of fishing operations. However, before 
granting CNM status to DPRK, Korea urged CCMs to recall that DPRK had been involved in 
IUU practices in 2003 and 2004, when they allowed two IUU vessels to fly the DPRK flag; they 
were at that time on the CCAMLR IUU list. Korea expressed its doubt that DPRK could carry out 
CNM responsibilities, and noted that DPRK had also failed to provide full WCPFC fisheries data, 
despite being requested to do so. 
Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea 
  
34. The USA concurred that granting of CNM status was premature. It noted questions regarding 
the DPRK’s ability and willingness to follow through with respect to WCPFC-related 
commitments. It also noted additional IUU activities by DPRK vessels, some as recent as April 
2008. The CCAMLR Secretariat has sought more information about these activities. Para 7 of 
CMM 2009-11 indicates that the Commission shall also consider information available from 
other RFMOs relating to non-members seeking CNM status, as well as data submitted by such 
non-members to the Commission in making a determination on a CNM application. The USA 
indicated it had little confidence that DPRK would follow through on its commitments. 
 
10 
 
35. Australia noted it had a similar view to that expressed by Korea and the USA, noting 
particular concerns about DPRK’s willingness and ability to exercise flag State control. 
Australian patrol vessels have taken part in some IUU-related actions mentioned by the USA. 
CMM 2009-11, para. 3(c) notes that an applicant’s record of responding to any IUU actions by 
vessels flying its flag is one of the issues to be considered. Australia indicated that paras 3(c) and 
7 of CMM 2009-11 have not been met by DPRK.  
36. WCPFC7 did not approve the application for CNM status by Democratic Peoples 
Republic of Korea. 
37. Noan Pakop (TCC6 Chair) indicated TCC6 recommended Ecuador for CNM status subject to 
additional information being provided. The Executive Director indicated that Ecuador responded 
to the Secretariat’s request for additional information by providing catch data for 2010, and by 
specifying its willingness to make voluntary financial contributions to the Commission and to 
accept high seas boarding and inspections. Dr John Hampton indicated that Ecuador had provided 
the necessary data for 2010, and had agreed to allow IATTC to provide any requested data in 
their possession to SPC. The Chair of IATTC confirmed IATTC’s willingness to cooperate with 
WCPFC and SPC in resolving any outstanding issues related to historical data.  
Ecuador 
38. The USA indicated that it took a specific interest in the previous (2009) application from 
Ecuador. It indicated that SPC was still examining the data that had been received, and noted that 
according to the information in WCPFC7-2010-20, no annual report (Part 1 or 2) had been 
submitted. It raised this concern, and noted that while it would not block a renewal of the CNM 
application in 2010, it encouraged Ecuador to submit all required elements in a timely fashion in 
the future. The USA stressed that it would look at the issue closely in 2011, and might take a 
stronger position if compliance did not improve. 
39. One CCM shared similar sentiments to those expressed by the USA and previously by FFA 
members, and inquired whether Ecuador had met VMS data requirements.  
40. Ecuador indicated their willingness to accept boarding and inspection of their vessels, and to 
make a financial contribution in accordance with the decision to be taken by WCPFC7. 
41. WCPFC7 approved the application for CNM status by Ecuador with the following 
participatory rights:   
The participatory rights of Ecuador for fishing in the WCPO are limited to purse seine 
fishing only. Purse-seine vessels of Ecuador shall not fish on the high seas.  
 
42. El Salvador indicated it has participated in the Commission for the last 3 years, and had 
supplied all requested data. Following TCC6 the Commission requested that El Salvador supply 
historical size data, but El Salvador noted a that the historical information was not available in the 
format required Data collection at the point of unloading began in November 2010, and that data 
will be provided in 2011. El Salvador explained its national laws prevented it from making an 
explicit commitment to providing a financial contribution as a non-member. El Salvador 
committed to providing a voluntary contribution as a CNM, and committed to making a regular 
financial contribution if invited to be a member. It asked for clarification regarding the process of 
becoming a full member, noting it had submitted previous requests to be considered for 
membership.  
El Salvador 
43. The Legal Adviser noted that Article 35(2) of the Convention regulates accession to the 
Convention by non-contracting parties. 
11 
 
44. Several CCMs expressed support for future consideration of El Salvador as a full member of 
the Commission, while noting the need to consider how such an invitation would be extended.  
45. WCPFC7 approved the application for renewal of CNM status by El Salvador with the 
following participatory rights:  
The participatory rights of El Salvador for fishing in the WCPO are limited to purse seine 
fishing only. The total level of effort by purse seine vessels of El Salvador vessels on the 
high seas shall not exceed 29 days.    
46. WCPFC7 discussed Indonesia’s long history in the work of the Commission, its ongoing 
contributions and efforts with respect to data collection and provision, and the internal legal 
constraints it faces in contributing financially as a CNM. 
Indonesia 
47. Indonesia indicated its intention to work with the Commission in resolving the issues that 
have prevented Indonesia from becoming a full Commission member.  
48. The Legal Advisor noted Indonesia’s special case status and its rights to become a Member 
whenever it wished due to its full participation in all meetings leading up to the establishment of 
the Commission and its long standing history of fishing in the Convention Area. 
49. WCPFC7 approved Indonesia’s application for renewal of its CNM status with the 
following participatory rights:   
Indonesia‘s fishing activities in the Convention Area are limited to a longline bigeye 
catch limit of 8,413 mt (less 20% or 6,730.4 mt) and purse-seine fishing on the high seas 
in the Convention Area is limited to 500 days. 
50. WCPFC7 encouraged Indonesia to apply compatible measures within its archipelagic waters 
given the significance of these waters for juvenile yellowfin and bigeye catch.  
51. Indonesia noted that it is participating in the new Global Environment Facility (GEF) West 
Pacific East Asia Oceanic Fisheries Management (WPEA OFM) project and cooperating with the 
Commission, particularly in areas of data collection improvement. Indonesia expressed its 
appreciation to the Commission for the decision to renew its CNM status and reiterated its 
intention to become a full member of the Commission. Indonesia stated that, consistent with its 
position throughout the Multilateral High Level Conference (MHLC) and Preparatory 
Conference, it considers that WCPFC CMMs do not apply to archipelagic waters. 
52. WCPFC7 approved the application for renewal of CNM status by Mexico with the 
following participatory rights:  
Mexico 
i. 
The participatory rights of Mexico for fishing in the WCPO are limited to purse 
seine fishing only. Purse seine vessels of Mexico shall not fish on the high seas. 
ii. 
Noting the need for cooperation with the work of the Northern Committee (NC), 
particularly in regard to Pacific bluefin tuna, Mexico is encouraged to participate 
in NC7 and is advised that future renewals of Mexico’s CNM status could be 
hampered by a continuing lack of participation in the work of the NC. 
iii. 
Mexican participation in the WCPO tuna fisheries may not begin until all 
requested information and commitments have been provided to the WPFC 
Secretariat in accordance with Commission requirements.  
12 
 
53. Senegal indicated it had supplied all available data, and asked for a temporary exemption on 
supplying a financial contribution, particularly as Senegal did not fish during 2008–2010. Senegal 
indicated it would endeavor to supply all relevant data should it commence fishing operations in 
the Convention Area, and was investigating the Commission’s query regarding the catch ratio of 
swordfish and sharks. It requested that the participatory rights that apply to Senegal be modified 
to allow another vessel with the same characteristics to replace the Robaleira should that vessel 
not be operational.  
Senegal 
54. WCPFC7 approved the application for renewal of CNM status by Senegal with the 
following participatory rights:  
The participatory rights of Senegal for fishing in the WCPO are limited to one unique 
longline vessel (the Robaleira). This vessel may only target swordfish. WCPFC7 tasked 
the Secretariat to calculate the swordfish catch limits that would apply to Senegal 
pursuant to the swordfish measure (CMM 2009-03) and to circulate this to all CCMs. 
55. The Commission requested that Senegal state in writing that it would accept boarding and 
inspection on the high seas. 
56. Vietnam indicated it does not fish in Convention Area, but is cooperating in providing the 
information and data requested by the Commission, will cooperate with boarding and inspection 
requests, and is ready to make a financial contribution if the Commission so decides.  
Vietnam 
57. WCPFC7 approved the application for renewal of CNM status by Vietnam with the 
following participatory rights:  
Noting the need for cooperation between Vietnam and the Commission to achieve 
compatibility of fisheries management and conservation, WCPFC7 agreed to grant CNM 
status to Vietnam for 2011 on the understanding that CNM status would only relate to the 
acquisition and exchange of fishery information and data and that Vietnam would require 
assistance in that regard. Vietnam has no participatory rights for fishing for highly 
migratory fish stocks in the high seas of the Convention Area. 
58. WCPFC7 approved the application for CNM status by Panama with the following 
participatory rights:  
Panama 
The participatory rights of Panama in the WCPO are limited to the provision of carrier 
and bunker vessels only.  
59. Thailand indicated it was approached by the Commission in 2009 regarding cooperation with 
the WCPFC, in particular regarding cannery landing data. It was agreed that initial data would 
focus on bigeye tuna, and data on other species would be complied as possible. Thailand noted it 
could face some difficulty in compiling data from small packers and canneries, but that its two 
main canneries already submit voluntary information to all RFMOs, including the WCPFC. 
Thailand is still awaiting a submission from tuna packers regarding whether all data can be 
collected. Internal consultations regarding budgetary contributions are ongoing. 
Thailand 
60. The Chair noted that Thailand’s request for CNM status was unusual, in that the WCPFC 
approached Thailand seeking cooperation regarding data, and that the relationship benefits the 
WCPFC. WCPFC members expressed broad support for extension of CNM status to Thailand. 
13 
 
The EU noted that the provision of such key data should be facilitated by a Catch Documentation 
Scheme.  
61. WCPFC7 approved the application for CNM status by Thailand with the following 
participatory rights:  
Noting the need for cooperation between Thailand and the Commission and the 
commitment from Thailand to provide data from canneries located in Thailand to assist in 
the work of the Commission, WCPFC7 agreed to grant CNM status to Thailand for 2011 
on the understanding that CNM status would only relate to the acquisition and exchange 
of fishery information and data. Thailand has no participatory rights for fishing for highly 
migratory fish stocks in the high seas of the Convention Area. 
2.3.1 Draft schedule of Contribution for CNMs 
62. WCPFC6 decided (in CMM 2009-11) to request contributions from CNMs, and tasked the 
Secretariat to make an estimate of their likely contributions if they were to contribute in 
accordance with para 2(g) of CMM 2009-11; the results were provided in WCPFC7-2010-
FAC4/14 (Rev 1), which includes Thailand.  
63. In reviewing the document the Chair noted there could be special circumstances in which the 
Commission may wish to dispense with the CNM contribution requirements.  He asked that the 
Commission consider this in its deliberations of CNM contributions, noting that such discretion 
was not possible under the proposal before WCPFC7. 
64. The recommendations of FAC4 were presented in WCPFC7-2010-32 (Rev 1), and the 
following decision was taken by WCPFC7 (under Agenda Item 10):  
i. 
all CNMs should make an annual contribution that is 50% of the amount that 
would be payable if the CNM was a member. This contribution formula is to be 
reviewed by the FAC in 2011.  
 
ii. 
the Executive Director shall inform CNMs and Members of the level of their 
recommended and assessed contributions as soon as practicable after each Annual 
Session with the amounts payable within 60 days of receipt of that notification. 
Contributions received from CNMs are to be used to reduce the assessed 
contributions of Members in the year following receipt. 
AGENDA  ITEM  3  -  MEMBER REPORTS 
3.1 
Annual Reports by the CCMs 
65. The following members and participating territories provided statements: Marshall Islands 
(on behalf of the PNA, Attachment F), Nauru (Attachment G), New Caledonia (Attachment H), 
Niue (Attachment I), Papua New Guinea (Attachment J), Philippines (Attachment K), Tokelau 
(Attachment L), Tuvalu (Attachment M) and Vietnam (Attachment N).  
3.2 
Statements of Non-Members 
66. The North Pacific Anadromous Fisheries Commission (Attachment O) and Greenpeace 
(Attachment P) also made statements. 
3.3 
Special requirements of Developing States 
67. PNG spoke on behalf of FFA members, and in its role as the FFC Chair, and introduced 
WCPFC7-2010-DP-10, which sets out the views of all 17 FFA members on the areas that capture 
the intent of Article 30 and Resolution 2008-01. PNG noted that in 2010 Pacific Leaders tasked 
14 
 
the regional agencies (FFA, SPC and the PNA) to explore options for optimising fisheries 
commercialisation to increase fisheries revenue beyond licensing fees, and highlighted the 
position of FFA members that the fleets of developed CCMs must be reduced or restructured so 
as to accommodate the aspirations of PICs to develop their own fisheries.  
68. Niue continued the presentation by FFA members of WCPFC7-2010-DP-10, and stressed the 
ongoing need for SIDS to receive assistance from developed partners in support of conservation 
and management, and acknowledged appreciation for the funding and support currently received 
from developed partners, bilaterally, through the WCPFC and through regional institutions. Niue 
(i) indicated that short-term training and longer-term academic scholarships, particularly in the 
areas of stock assessment and fisheries science, remain an important priority; (ii) encouraged that 
funding to be provided to the Special Requirements Fund or from other funds to support possible 
funding shortfalls in the 2011 SPC stock assessment workshops for Pacific Islands scientists; and 
(iii) encouraged that attachment opportunities be provided to Pacific Island nationals with the 
WCPFC Secretariat, with regional agencies, and well-established national fisheries 
administrations/research agencies.   
69. FSM, concluded the presentation by FFA members of WCPFC7-2010-DP-10, noting that the 
outcomes and discussions during the Kobe II Workshop on RFMO Management of tuna fisheries 
(hosted by FFA in June/July 2010) clearly articulate the importance of rights-based management 
as a means to address the interests of developing coastal States, particularly SIDS, in fisheries, 
including high seas fisheries. FSM noted that the Bellagio Framework for Sustainable Tuna 
Fisheries provides tuna RFMOs with examples of ways rights-based management can be used to 
accommodate the aspirations of SIDS while addressing overfishing and overcapacity, including 
through transfers of vessels and/or quotas, which could assist SIDS and other small economically 
vulnerable states in development of their fisheries. Transfers could be facilitated by issuing time-
limited rights to current users that revert to developing coastal states on expiration; landing taxes 
or annual fees on current fishers; and property rights on the high seas that are allocated to 
developing coastal states where the corresponding use rights can be rented, leased or fished. FFA 
members also suggested that a Tuna Corporation (similar to the “Enterprise” established in 
UNCLOS for deep sea mining) could be established in which individual countries hold shares. 
The corporation would contract with the lowest cost fleets to capture the tuna quotas and 
distribute the rents among its “shareholders.” Zone-based management arrangements are being 
developed for longline fisheries to replace the current flag-based allocations. Rights-based 
regimes that first recognise the zone-based management arrangements, and secondly facilitate the 
participation of SIDS in high seas fisheries are priorities for FFA members, and will be 
considered in future CMMs.   
70. The Marshall Islands noted that including the special requirements of developing states as a 
regular item on the agenda was a positive step, and indicated that all measures should always 
consider the needs of SIDS first; it indicated that there were no “historical fishing industry rights”. 
RMI thanked members for the assistance provided to it and looked forward to reports in 2011 that 
described real economic investments. 
71. Solomon Islands voiced support for the statement made by Marshall Islands, noting that the 
development of national flag fishing fleets is an important aspiration of SIDS, and consistent with 
Resolution 2008-01, and article 30 of the Convention. Solomon Islands stated it will increase its 
nationally flagged and managed purse-seine fleet, and looked forward to the support and 
encouragement of its development partners.  
72. Tuvalu expressed support for previous comments made by FFA members. Tuvalu thanked 
those who had contributed to the special requirement fund, and provided assistance with short-
term training in stock assessment, data workshops, observer activities and other related training. 
15 
 
However, Tuvalu expressed concern with poor progress in implementing the special requirements 
for developing states to help foster domestic development, including through assistance and 
support to build and expand its domestic fleets and onshore development, pursuing realistic 
projects with significant economic impact, and crewing and certifications initiatives similar to 
that pursued by the PNA. Tuvalu also sought a long-term commitment by the Commission and 
developed CCMs to provide opportunities for Pacific Island scientists and fisheries managers to 
pursue relevant academic qualifications, internships and fellowships. Tuvalu noted its intent to 
expand its domestic operations through partnership arrangements and to increase its participation 
in both its in-zone and the high seas fisheries, including through acquisition of vessels from some 
CCMs.  
73. Japan outlined the assistance it provides for SIDS, including through improvement of 
infrastructure of SIDS, for fisheries and other activities. During 2004–2008 Japan spent over $2 
billion on assistance to Pacific Island states, including over $7 million in construction of fishing 
ports and markets in PNG and RMI, constructing a fishing port in Tuvalu, and fishery facilities in 
Kiribati. Japan noted that the construction would benefit all parties, and not just Japan, indicating 
a Chinese company was using a fishing port and airport Japan constructed in FSM. Japan noted 
that capacity-building efforts had involved some 200 experts over a 5-year period, and that 
experts were also involved in maintaining fishing vessels. In addition to providing fishing vessels, 
Japan provided promotional funds to FFA that can be used for international meeting attendance. 
Japan has also established a trust fund for the WCPFC. Japan expressed its intention to extend 
and intensify this type of cooperation for developing states. 
74. The EU noted its support for the SIDS reporting process. The EU presented a preliminary 
report at TCC6, and has produced a new version of that report for WCPFC7 (WCPFC-2010-
DP33). The EU aims to reinforce the role of PICs in organisations such as the WCPFC, noting 
that effective multilateral cooperation benefits all participants, especially in terms of effective 
resource management. The EU’s main support comes from the European Development Fund, 
which provides $42 million explicitly for fisheries projects in 2008–2012. The goal is sustainable 
management, and maximization of economic benefits for the region. One of the EU programs 
funds most of the research underpinning the work of the WCPFC Scientific Committee. Most 
EU-funded projects are implemented by FFA and SPC. There are also direct contributions made 
by some EU member states. The EU provided specific details on several projects, and reiterated 
its support for reviewing steps taken for addressing the rights and aspirations of SIDS, and 
reporting regularly on new initiatives that arise. 
75. Tonga noted the importance of the issue, and acknowledged the assistance provided by 
developed members, but joined other FFA members in calling for full recognition of the needs of 
SIDS. Tonga stressed the need to enhance its capacity to manage fishery resources, through 
financial and other means. 
76. The USA referred to a paper it presented at TCC6 (TCC6-2010-DP-17), noting it had 
contributed to the Commission’s Article 30 fund, and devoted significant time, energy and funds 
in building observer programme capacity; in enforcement-related activities; in supporting 
regional fisheries enforcement efforts; and on fish and turtle tagging studies. Recently the USA 
sent staff members to work in RMI and FSM to undertake port sampling; and the USA provides 
capacity building support to Palau, FSM, and RMI through its Compact arrangements. The USA 
offered to provide additional information, and to discuss internship opportunities with interested 
members.  
77. New Zealand fully supported the proposals made by Pacific SIDS, and recognized the 
importance of fisheries for economic growth in the Pacific. New Zealand is working more closely 
with SIDS to understand what is wanted and needed, and is providing assistance with a focus on 
16 
 
tangible results. New Zealand outlined a range of training programs that it is providing, and its 
efforts to strengthen linkages with industry, and encourage the development of a developed states 
reporting template. 
78. Korea noted the aspirations of SIDS for achieving these through fishing industry 
development. Korea is assisting with infrastructure in Solomon Islands, including a tuna 
processing plant and associated industry; the joint venture is scheduled to commence in 2011, and 
will be followed by cooperation between Korea and other SIDS. Korea is also providing funding 
for tagging, and assisting with crew training for SIDS. 
79. Chinese Taipei indicated it supported capacity building through a regional observer training 
programme, and has some nationals from island states in its vessel crews. Support was also 
provided for fisheries development projects proposed by SIDS, and for the special requirements 
fund (40,000 USD). Chinese Taipei also assists SIDS to obtain fishing vessels and investment, in 
keeping with Resolution 2008-01. The investment in onshore facilities by private sector is helping 
SIDS to develop their fisheries in conjunction with acquisition of purse seine fishing vessel was 
consistent with resolution 2008/01 in assisting SIDS in the development of their fisheries, despite 
the criticism of by some members of creating overcapacity in the region, resulting the adoption of 
2005-02”  
80. Vanuatu fully supported the statements made by other FFA members, and acknowledged 
assistance provided to it by Japan, the EU, USA, China, Australia, New Zealand and France. 
81. The Philippines noted the various types of assistance given to developing nations, and 
encouraged developed CCMs to provide assistance in the form of investment as well, as it has 
done.  
82.  RMI thanked those CCMs that had provided reports. In particular RMI thanked developed 
CCMs for the various assistance currently being provided in the region including non-fisheries 
assistance. RMI also referred to Resolution 2008-01 and Article 30 of the Convention and 
encouraged CCMs to also focus future reports on implementation of those provisions. 
83. The Chair looked forward to future reports describing more targeted cooperation. 
3.4 
Annual Report of the Work of the Commission 
84. The Executive Director presented WCPFC7-2010-11, which presents a profile of the 
Commission‘s work during 2010. The report summarizes the work of the WCPFC subsidiary 
bodies, the Secretariat, contracts and consultancies, relations with other organizations and 
emerging issues. The Executive Director noted staff changes during 2010, and that the VMS audit 
would be undertaken in cooperation with FFA, and utilise CCM staff members rather than 
consultants.  
 
85. WCPFC7 took note of the annual report of the work of the Commission.  
 
3.4.1 
Cooperation with other Organisations 
 
86. The Executive Director noted the continued support from and cooperation with SPC, FFA, 
the new PNA office, ISC, and IATTC, and the value of internships and secondments to the work 
of the Commission. He noted in particular: 
a) the proposed amendment to the WCPFC/SPC MOU on data sharing to permit SPC 
access to VMS data for compliance and science purposes; 
b) the Chair’s signing of the MOU between WCPFC and the North Pacific Anadromous 
Fish Commission; 
17 
 
c) IATTC’s proposed changes to the IATTC/WCPFC ROP Cross Endorsement 
Memorandum of Cooperation (MOC), and ongoing efforts by the EU with regard to this 
MOC (WCPFC7-2010 DP-25); and  
d) the need for discussion with IATTC regarding a joint management plan for the overlap 
area, noting the recommendations from TCC6 that the Heads of the WCPFC and IATTC 
secretariats meet to develop a Joint Management Scheme. The Secretariat invited 
WCPFC7 to provide guidance to the Executive Director as to the minimum criteria for 
the joint management scheme. 
87. The Commission directed the Executive Director to work with the IATTC Director in 
development of draft TORs for a Joint Management Scheme proposal, and to present those 
TORs to the Commission intersessionally in mid-2011.  
88. The EU introduced WCPFC7-2010 DP-25 on the cross endorsement of observers.  
89. PNG, on behalf of FFA members thanked the EU for their efforts in progressing the issue 
since TCC6. While supporting the Memorandum of Cooperation (MOC) as proposed, FFA 
members sought clarification from the Legal Adviser regarding whether a cross-endorsed IATTC 
observer on a vessel that moves out of the high seas and commences fishing in an EEZ would be 
required to stop recording data in the EEZ. 
90. FFA members sought assurance of the Commission that if it transpires that cross endorsed 
observers that are not FFA observers continues to record when vessels are moving from high seas 
to EEZs of FFA states, then FFA members will have the ability to initiate an immediate review or 
termination by the Commission.  FFA members recommended that WCPFC7 approve the draft 
MOC and direct the Secretariat to consult with IATTC with a view to signing the MOC as soon 
as possible.  FFA also recommended that WCPFC7 agree that the WCPFC Secretariat would 
issue a notice of intention to terminate the MOC immediately upon request of three or more 
CCMs. 
91. Other CCMs voiced support for developing and signing an MOC as soon as possible, to 
facilitate the operation of vessels that operate in both convention areas; they voiced support for a 
precautionary approach that ensures effective conservation measures are in effect in the overlap 
area, and for exploring ways in which the two RFMOs can work together more closely and 
effectively. The Director of the IATTC gave his assurance that all members of the IATTC would 
be open to cooperation with the WCPFC, but noted there were complex issues to be addressed.  
92. WCPFC7 adopted WCPFC7-2010 DP-25 (Rev. 2) on Cross Endorsement of Observers 
(Attachment Q) noting the recommendations of FFA in para 90. 
 
3.4.2 
Future work of the Commission 
93. Australia noted, on behalf of FFA members, that the current MOU between the ISC and 
WCPFC includes in Part 4 a clause that stipulates a full review of the MOU will be undertaken 
every three years.  At WCPFC6 FFA members proposed the review be undertaken during 2010. 
Australia noted FFA members remain supportive of the recommendations of the Independent 
Review of Science Structure and Function, adopted by WCPFC6, and strongly believe that (i) the 
role of the ISC should be primarily in relation to the three northern stocks; (ii) SC must be able to 
directly request advice from the ISC on the status of North Pacific stocks; and (iii) the suggested 
changes to the MOU proposed by the Secretariat in 2009 are a helpful basis for revising the MOU 
between ISC and WCPFC.  They emphasized there should be a single stream of scientific advice 
coming to the Commission through the SC, and a closer working relationship between the SC and 
the ISC, to allow the SC to directly request advice from the ISC. 
18 
 
94. The Executive Director indicated that proposed changes to the MOU were considered at 
NC6.  
95. The NC Chair indicated that NC6 agreed no changes were required.  
96. FSM, on behalf of FFA members, supported the comment by Australia, and stressed that 
scientific advice should come through the SC, irrespective of the region it relates to, to enable the 
Commission to receive scientific advice of a consistent standard and subject to the same standard 
of scientific scrutiny and review by the SC for the entire Convention Area.   
97. FFA members recommended that the Commission agree to a decision that “the MOU 
between WCPFC and ISC should be revised to better align it with the Convention and to ensure a 
single stream of scientific advice comes to the Commission through the Scientific Committee.  
There should be a closer working relationship between the SC and the ISC, specifically to allow 
the SC to directly request advice from the ISC.” 
98. Japan indicated that the MOU derived from the special history of the NC, and indicated its 
support for enhancing the cooperation between the SC and ISC, while stressing there was no need 
to amend the MOU. 
99. The Chair noted the issues had been raised in the SC meeting, and that there appeared to be 
some unease in the relationship between the two bodies: it was felt there should be some 
standardization in scientific advice received by SC and NC. He expressed concern that there 
should be a standard approach to scientific advice, so that members are sure that the basis for 
scientific advice is the same. This has also been addressed in other bodies.  
100. Several CCMs noted that a useful minimum improvement would be to have ISC stock 
assessments presented to the SC in full.  
101. WCPFC7 directed that the Secretariat undertake a review of the MOU between 
WCPFC and ISC in 2011, and that it be addressed at WCPFC8. The MOU is to be modified 
to expressly address (i) participation by the WCPFC Science Provider in the 2011 north 
Pacific striped marlin assessment, and (ii) presentation of the assessment to SC7 for review.   
102. In response to a query regarding information presented in p. 6 of WCPFC7-2010-11, the 
Executive Director indicated the Secretariat was exploring ways to improve reporting to CCMs 
on activities (e.g. meetings and consultations) undertaken by Secretariat staff, including via a 
quarterly newsletter.  
AGENDA  ITEM  4  -  PROPOSED CMMs FOR CONSIDERATION AT THIS 
MEETING  
103. CMMs are addressed under Agenda Item 9. 
AGENDA  ITEM  5  -  SCIENCE ISSUES 
5.1 
Report of the Sixth Regular Session of the Scientific Committee 
104. The Chair of the Scientific Committee, Dr Naozumi Miyabe (Japan), provided a summary 
of the Sixth Regular Session of the Scientific Committee (SC6) which was held 10–19August, 
2010 at Nuku’alofa, Tonga.   
 
5.1.1 
Stock status of key tuna species and evaluation of CMM 2008-01 
105.  Dr John Hampton (SPC Oceanic Fisheries Programme Manager) presented an overview of 
the WCPO fisheries stock status for skipjack, yellowfin, bigeye and South Pacific albacore. The 
total 2009 catch of 2.48 million mt was a record, and dominated by skipjack and yellowfin. The 
19 
 
catch was driven by the purse seine fishery, with skipjack being the predominant species taken. 
The purse seine catch in 2009 had a typical equatorial distribution. In 2009 the catch included a 
strong eastern component, as is typical of El Nino years. Purse seine effort has continued to 
increase over time. There are two key components: associated sets and unassociated sets; both 
have continued to increase over time in roughly equal amounts. Bigeye tuna catch by purse seine 
is concentrated in associated sets. The longline catch in 2009 showed strong concentration of 
albacore tuna, to about 66,000 mt. There is also decline in tropical longline fishery targeting 
bigeye tuna and yellowfin; that is consistent with information to be reported on effort in the 
longline fishery. The highest longline effort is between 20°N to 10°S. The skipjack catch has 
continued to increase rapidly, and reached approximately 1.7 million mt in 2009, dominated by 
purse seine catch. The pole and line contribution continues to decline. 
106. The WCPO skipjack stock is decreasing slowly, and is now about 50% depleted from an 
unexploited level. This is a moderate level of depletion: the stock is not overfished, and there is 
no overfishing.  However, at some time in the near future a decision will have to be made as to 
the acceptable level of depletion and future harvest strategies for this stock.  
107. Yellowfin was assessed in 2009. Catch increased in 2008 after a period of stability, but 
there has not been the same growth in the yellowfin catch as has been seen for skipjack. There is 
evidence that the full exploitation potential of yellowfin has been reached. The yellowfin stock 
has decreased steadily, and it is now around 50% of the unexploited biomass. This is considered 
to be a moderate level of depletion. Depletion is much stronger in the western equatorial zone, 
where 90% of the catch occurs. In this region there is much steeper decline in biomass, and much 
larger impacts of fishing.  
108. Bigeye was assessed in 2010. The catch has been stable for the past 10 years. The longline 
catch is mainly of adults, but there is a recent increase in the purse seine catch following FAD 
introduction. The purse seine catch reported in statistical bulletins is probably underestimated, an 
issue which is being addressed through ongoing work on purse seine species composition by 
various methods (grab vs. spill sampling). Bigeye biomass has declined steadily over a long 
period of time. In the absence of fishing, the assessment suggests that biomass would have 
increased strongly due to increased recruitment in last 20 years. There is an element of 
uncertainty in this result, and early stock size and recruitment may be underestimated. In recent 
years there has been a very high level of depletion compared to what it would be in the absence of 
fishing. 
109. South Pacific albacore was assessed in 2009. The fishery is composed almost entirely of 
longline vessels catching adult albacore. The catch has doubled since the mid-1990s, and is now 
in excess of 60,000 mt. There is also a small troll fishery in New Zealand. The South Pacific 
albacore assessment shows biomass has declined steadily since the mid-1970s. The current level 
of depletion of the stock due to fishing is ~ 30% (a moderate level of depletion), and current 
catches are sustainable. The stock is not overfished, and there is no overfishing. 
110. In summary, a composite Kobe Plot of spawning biomass shows concerns for bigeye tuna, 
and for yellowfin in the western equatorial area.  
111. Kiribati spoke on behalf of FFA members, and accepted the conclusions and 
recommendations on the management of the various stocks as outlined, and proposed that the SC 
advice on stock status be adopted by the Commission as the basis for work on stock management 
by the Commission. FFA members noted (i) that the bigeye assessment was more optimistic than 
the 2009 assessment, but that the status of the stock would have been worse and the 
recommended reductions greater if the model run with a different value for steepness was used as 
a basis for the advice; and (ii) the increase in the impact of fishing on the skipjack stock, pointing 
to the need to give greater priority to addressing skipjack stock status in the Commission’s work. 
20 
 
 
112. Several CCMs noted with concern the condition of bigeye tuna, western yellowfin, and 
skipjack stocks, and the need for action to preserve stocks. 
113. In response to queries from CCMs, Dr Hampton provided the following additional 
information:  
i. 
in conducting stock assessments SPC makes many model runs using different model 
configurations, with some much simpler than others. Where possible parallel 
assessments are also conducted using different modeling platforms; 
ii. 
a rapid change in skipjack biomass is possible, depending on recruitment, as most 
skipjack fisheries focus on 1 or 2 age classes. A decline in skipjack fisheries has been 
observed off Japan, which may reflect reduced availability of skipjack in peripheral 
areas due to high exploitation in the core equatorial area. There is a need to better 
understand the links between stocks, and tagging programs should assist in this 
regard; 
iii. 
the recruitment trend in bigeye tuna is a particular concern, and is driven by a 
relatively flat or slowly declining longline CPUE trend in combination with the rapid 
expansion in the catch of juvenile bigeye tuna since the mid-1990s. The credibility of 
the estimated recruitment trend is therefore related to the credibility of the longline 
CPUE, particularly in the 1960s and 1970s. This is an issue that needs to be 
addressed with some urgency;  
iv. 
the bigeye tuna stock assessment indicates that a 29% reduction in fishing mortality 
is needed to reduce fishing mortality to FMSY.  
v. 
caution is needed when comparing skipjack MSY and catch levels, as there is large 
variability in recruitment. Recent skipjack recruitment is somewhat higher than the 
long-term average, which can result in high catches in relation to equilibrium yield; 
vi. 
availability of skipjack in the South Pacific varies significantly from year to year, 
especially in Australian and New Zealand waters, making it hard to detect long-term 
trends. SPC is currently examining the issue of possible range contraction in skipjack 
and other tuna stocks. 
114. The Commission accepted the following SC6 recommendations and findings on the 
status of the key tuna stocks: 
i. 
A minimum 29% reduction in bigeye tuna fishing mortality from the average levels for 
2005–2008 with the goal of returning the fishing mortality rate to FMSY. 
ii. 
There was no new information on the stock status of yellowfin tuna in 2010, and 
management recommendations from SC5 are to be maintained. 
iii. 
There was no new information on the stock status of South Pacific albacore tuna in 2010 
and management recommendations from SC5 are to be maintained. 
iv. 
The management advice from SC5 on South Pacific swordfish is to be maintained 
pending a new assessment or other new information.  
v. 
A new stock assessment was not conducted for southwest Pacific striped marlin and the 
stock status description and management recommendations from SC2 are to be 
maintained.  
vi. 
Adoption of the conservation advice provided by ISC9 on North Pacific albacore.  
vii. 
Adoption of the conservation advice provided by ISC10 on Pacific bluefin tuna (that the 
level of F be decreased below the 2002–2004 levels, particularly on juvenile age classes). 
21 
 
viii. 
Adoption of the conservation advice provided by ISC10 on North Pacific swordfish 
stocks (that both swordfish stocks in the North Pacific are healthy and above the level 
required to sustain recent catches). 
ix. 
For North Pacific striped marlin: 
a) develop/adopt an interim CMM for 2011;  
b) request that the ISC provide estimated catch levels corresponding to average 
fishing mortality during 2001–2003 and fishing mortality reference points 
including Fmsy and F at various spawning potential ratios; and 
c) that the Scientific Services Provider participate in the north Pacific striped 
marlin assessment led by the ISC and that the assessment be presented to 
SC7 for review . 
115. The Commission also accepted the following SC6 recommendations and observations:  
i. 
the continuation of the bigeye tuna age and reproductive biology study;  
ii. 
the work plan of the Fishing Technology theme;  
iii. 
a review of South Pacific swordfish data during 2011, will be presented to SC7.  
iv. 
collation of southwest Pacific striped marlin data for a planned stock assessment in 2012; 
v. 
full stock assessments of WCPO bigeye, skipjack and yellowfin tuna, and an update of 
south Pacific albacore, while noting that the USA facilitated an independent peer review 
of the 2009 WCPO yellowfin tuna assessment and the review will be forwarded to the 
Scientific Services Provider for use in the April 2011 stock assessment preparatory 
workshop; 
vi. 
the recommendations of the Management Issues theme regarding: 
a) continuation of limit reference points identification;  
b) further analyses of the effectiveness of the FAD closure, including through 
examination of observer reports; and 
c) implementation of Kobe II joint RFMO workshop outcomes;  
vii. 
the recommendations of the Ecosystem and Bycatch Mitigation theme, noting the various 
research findings relating to seabirds;  
viii. 
that the budget for the collection and evaluation of purse-seine species composition data 
be increased by US$30,000; 
ix. 
that SC strategic plan contains no requirement for a mandatory external peer review; and  
x. 
the new SC meeting structure. 
 
116. The WCPFC7 discussed the timing of and required data for a south Pacific swordfish stock 
assessment. It was noted that a further stock assessment would be difficult to progress until 
operational level catch and effort and size data was available from vessels fishing in the South 
Central pacific area, particularly a fleet flying the flag of one of the EU member States, as well as 
issues with fleets of some other CCMs. The EU drew attention to the suggestions for improving 
the SC work and structure submitted in intersessional EU correspondence to WCPFC CCMs 
(WCPFC-2010-IP10) 
117. The Commission directed the Secretariat to make written requests to members 
seeking the cooperation of all CCMs that fish for the species in providing detailed size data 
and operational-level logsheet data specifying catch and effort, in order to enable a full 
assessment to be undertaken in 2012.  
 
 
22 
 
 
Management Objectives Workshop  
118. CCMs supported the holding of the proposed Management Objectives Workshop as an 
important necessary step towards the analysis of management strategies and adoption of reference 
points.  They requested that the WCPFC Secretariat ensure in its workshop planning that 
management objectives are firmly based on and reflect the full range of considerations related to 
stock management provided for by the Convention. In addition, members noted it was essential 
that the work on management objectives should also reflect multi-species considerations. It was 
proposed that the workshop also explore a pilot programme for applying the Kobe II Strategy 
Matrix for bigeye tuna.  
119. The EU requested clarification on how the proposed independent international experts 
would be selected, suggesting this should be done under the direction of the Commission, and 
how members and their scientists and managers would be involved in the preparatory work, 
including in the preparation of TOR. A CCM also indicated limits on the catch of adult bigeye 
tuna should also be considered.  
120. In response to a CCM’s question on the impacts of longline catch on bigeye tuna stock, the 
SC chair noted that SPC, through its analysis, was seeking to capture information on the impact 
of CMM 2008-01 on adult bigeye catch, and stressed the need to ensure effective measures to 
reduce juvenile bigeye catch, as it could result in rapid reduction in MSY. He noted that purse 
seine fishing in association with FADs was impacting spawning stock biomass, and agreed that 
protection of adult bigeye would also be beneficial.  
121. The Executive Director noted that the selection of independent international experts was 
normally done in consultation with the WCPFC Committee chairs and Members, to reflect a good 
balance between the interests in the Commission. He also indicated that there was a strong link 
between management objectives and science, and that both scientists and managers should attend 
the workshop, but this should not interfere with setting of science-based objectives.  
122. The Commission directed the Secretariat to prepare TORs for the Management 
Objectives Workshop, which is to be held in 2012. 
Paired spill / grab experimental sampling 
123. CCMs strongly supported the SC recommendation that further work be done to extend 
paired spill/grab experimental sampling and verify this data against cannery, unloading and port 
sampling data. Members noted the importance of improving purse-seine species composition data 
for the assessments of several major species, and the need to increase the budget for this project 
in the SC work programme. Some CCMs voiced concern regarding the setting of budget priorities, 
suggesting a need to periodically reassess Commission funding allocation, and to seek to avoid 
budget increases. 
124. PNG inquired how national-level ROP data from port sampling could be utilized.  
125. Dr Hampton (SPC) supported the interventions calling for more work on paired spill/grab 
experimental sampling, indicating the work was of a very high priority. He noted good prior 
cooperation from some CCM industries, and requested that such cooperation be extended in the 
future when paired sampling trials were conducted aboard member’s vessels. In response to the 
query from PNG he noted the desire to use port sampling data collected by members through 
national programs to the extent possible, but indicated that the best way to determine purse seine 
species composition is through sampling at sea by observers, as fish may be transshipped and 
mixed onboard vessels. 
23 
 
126. The Commission agreed to increase the budget for the spill/grab sampling project 
from $60,000 to $90,000.  
Peer review of the bigeye stock assessment 
127. The SC Chair recommended that a budget be provided for a peer review of the 2010 bigeye 
tuna stock assessment in 2011, if required. 
128. The USA advised the review deadline for bigeye tuna had passed, and could not be done in 
2011.  
129. At the FAC4 meeting, it was proposed to conduct a workshop-style review, rather than a 
desk study review, in early 2012 based on the 2011 bigeye assessment; this will provide an in-
depth review that interacts with the stock assessment scientists. The workshop-style review of the 
2011 bigeye stock assessment will be convened in early 2012, in consultation with SPC; a 
relevant budget will be proposed by SC7 to WCPFC8. 
130. 
The Commission endorsed undertaking a workshop-style peer-review of the 2011 
bigeye stock assessment in early 2012.  
Administration: Outstanding issues from the Independent Review 
131. WCPFC7 took note of the responses by SC6 to the issues to be addressed from the 
Independent Review of the Commission’s Transitional Science Structure and Functions including 
the endorsement of the revised TOR for the Stock Assessment Preparatory Workshop 
(Attachment L of the SC6 Summary Report). 
5.1.2 
Shark Assessment and Research Plan 
132. Dr Shelley Clarke (SPC) presented WCPFC7-2010-16, summarizing progress toward shark 
assessments. She noted that the Shark Research Plan (endorsed by SC6) is designed to lay a 
scientific foundation for further consideration by WCPFC of stock status and sustainability of key 
shark species within the Convention Area. The information presented in WCPFC7-2010-16 
reflects the exploratory analyses of available data initiated as preliminary steps toward stock 
assessments. While some interesting trends were identified, ongoing data gaps and biases have 
yet to be fully addressed and conclusions about stock status would be premature. SPC will 
continue analyses based on existing data, but it is becoming increasingly clear that better 
information is required. Without additional research and data contributions, it is likely that stock 
assessments for some species will be severely compromised. She highlighted the importance of 
decisions to be made by WCPFC7 with respect to: 
i. 
approval of the Shark Research Plan  
ii. 
reallocation of existing funds within the Scientific Services Provider’s budget to support 
shark assessment through 2012, thereby enabling three shark stock assessments (silky, 
oceanic whitetip and blue) to be completed by the end of 2012; and  
iii. 
inclusion of the eight key shark species listed in CMM 2009-04 in catch reporting to the 
Commission, including annual catches, operational level data (where applicable), and 
recreational catch and effort data (where possible), as recommended by SC6, which 
would greatly expand the logsheet data available for the shark assessments.  
133. The USA noted that undigitized historical data on shark catches from the early days of the 
observer programme may contain information on haulback fate and mortality and may be made 
available. 
134. Palau, on behalf of FFA members, supported enhancement of the Commission’s shark 
management activities as a high-priority activity, and adoption of the Plan. FFA members also 
welcomed the review of information on shark stock status requested by the Commission in CMM 
24 
 
2009-04, which illustrates the work needed by the Commission prior to conducting formal stock 
assessments of key shark species, and supported making use of the available information while 
the arrangements are put in place to improve data. They supported SC recommendations on 
improving data for key shark species, which will be assisted by implementation of ROP 
requirements for observer coverage on longline vessels. FFA members indicated that assessment 
of shark stocks will need to depend on existing data for the near future, and thanked CCMs for 
making the data available. 
135. A CCM expressed concerns that some longline fishermen had trouble in accurately 
identifying shark species. It suggested silky shark should not be a priority for data collection.  
136. The EU supported the approach outlined, including the reporting requirements, and agreed 
hammerheads and porbeagles should be added to the list of key shark species.  . The EU has 
adopted an action plan for sharks, and is implementing a project that seeks to improve the 
provision of scientific advice for that action plan, including collation and examination of 
historical catch and effort data by shark species for EU vessels in all oceans. Once available, the 
results will be shared with all RFMOs. 
137. Japan confirmed that shark data had been submitted to SPC and invited SPC scientists to 
conduct joint shark data analyses with Japan. They noted with concern a large amount of 
unreported shark catch by small-scale longliners belonging to one CCM. Japan encouraged the 
Commission to adopt a CDS to assist with such issues in relation to sharks. Japan requested that 
the SC address hammerhead sharks, as it is the most prized species in shark fin markets.  
138. China supported the need to collect data on shark species, including possibly through a 
CDS. China noted the need to identify different species, possibly through a genetic database.  
139. Australia supported Palau’s intervention, and noted the usefulness of observer coverage on 
longline vessels (from 2012). It suggested that further action by the Commission on mitigation 
practices realting to sharks, for example consideration of the use of wire traces, need not wait for 
the outcomes of the shark research plan. Australia proposed adoption of the recommendation of 
the SC regarding key shark species by amending CMM 2009-04 to include porbeagle and 
hammerhead sharks.  
140. Korea noted the importance of shark research, but advocated prioritizing SC projects 
within the Commission budget. Korea also urged careful consideration of whether a CDS would 
be applied to all shark species, and how it could be made cost effective. 
141. New Zealand supported the research plan, noting the work was constrained by the low 
quality of available data. New Zealand supported data reporting requirements for sharks, addition 
of porbeagles and hammerheads to the list of key shark species, and the need for minimum 
standards for collection of bycatch data. 
142. PNG supported the shark research work, indicating it has a shark fishery that makes use of 
the entire shark, and has had a management plan in place for the last 10 years. Data is supplied to 
SPC.  
143. The Secretariat noted that expansion of the list of key shark species in CMM 2009-04 
would result in expansion of the list of species that CCMs are asked to report on from 8 to 13 
species. However, assessments under the Shark Research Plan would for the time being be 
limited to the original 8 key species, until such time as additional funding is agreed by the 
Commission. 
144. WCPFC7 approved the shark research plan and the reallocation of existing funds 
within the Scientific Services budget to support shark assessments during 2011 and 2012. 
WCPFC7 agreed to add porbeagle and four species of hammerhead sharks to the 
25 
 
Commission’s key shark species in CMM 2009-04 (Attachment DD). This amendment raises 
the number of key shark species to be reported to the Commission to 13 but maintains the 
original 8 key species as the focus of the Shark Research Plan until further funding is made 
available.  
5.2 
Kobe II Workshop recommendations on Science and Bycatch 
145. The Commission accepted the Kobe II science and bycatch recommendations (as 
contained in Attachment M of the SC6 Report), and recommended that the WCPFC 
Secretariat take the lead in working with the other tuna RFMOs to establish a bycatch 
working group to meet at the earliest opportunity. Kobe III may present an opportunity for 
a meeting of this group. The Secretariat will consult with members on the representation on 
this working group. 
5.3 
Programme of Work for the Scientific Committee in 2011 
146. The SC Chair presented the programme of work for the Scientific Committee in 2011, with 
a total proposed budget of US$1,066,000. Within the proposed work programme, the work on 
seabirds to continue the ERA analysis of areas of high seabird interactions (US$10,000) was 
deferred. The FAC approved funding for a workshop on management objectives for 2011 
however subsequent discussion in WCPFC7 decided that due to a heavy schedule of meetings the 
workshop should be deferred to 2012. The secretariat has noted the need to quarantine the 
funding for use in 2012. 
147.  Tonga spoke on behalf of FFA members and thanked Dr Miyabe and his Vice Chair and 
team of conveners for the SC6 report and for the efficient conduct of the SC meeting.  FFA 
members noted the benefits of the new meeting structure, and the clarity of the summary report, 
and drew attention to the continuing advice from the SC that data deficiencies are affecting the 
quality of the scientific analysis and advice, and the WCPFC7 working papers that demonstrated 
the implications of incomplete, late or inaccurate data for the production of timely and reliable 
stock assessments.  FFA members requested WCPFC7 record its concern regarding the 
continuing failure of CCMs to provide timely complete and accurate data and the effect of this 
failure on the Commission’s scientific advice.  
148. The Commission approved the 2011 SC work programme, and total budget of 
US$1,086,000, including the following specific elements, noting that $30,000 will be carried 
forward to fund the management options workshop in 2012: 
i. 
three full stock assessments of bigeye, yellowfin and skipjack tuna, one updated 
assessment of south Pacific albacore, and key shark stock assessments (to be conducted 
by the Scientific Services Provider [SPC-OFP], in addition to other regular services as 
described in the previous services agreement), noting that if the yellowfin assessment 
does not occur $70,000 would need to be carried forward till 2012.; 
ii. 
continuation of the WPEA OFM Project; 
iii. 
refinement of bigeye parameters Pacific-wide; 
iv. 
continuation of the Pacific-wide tagging project; 
v. 
identification of provisional reference points work for key tuna species; 
vi. 
collection and evaluation of purse-seine species composition data 
vii. 
collation of South Pacific striped marlin data for a planned stock assessment in 2012; and 
viii. 
support for the 2012 Management Options workshop.  
26 
 
AGENDA  ITEM  6  -  NORTHERN COMMITTEE 
6.1 
Report of the Sixth Regular Session of the Northern Committee  
149. The Chair of the Northern Committee, Masanori Miyahara (Japan) introduced the 
outcomes of the Sixth Regular Session of the Northern Committee (NC6) held from 7–10 
September 2010 in Fukuoka, Japan. He also briefly introduced WCPFC7-2010/35 (discussed 
under Agenda item 9.3.5) and WCPFC7-2010-35 (discussed under Agenda item 9.3.9)  
6.2 
Programme of Work for the Northern Committee  in 2011–2013 
150. The NC Chair referred to the programme of work contained in Attachment E of the NC6 
Summary Report.  He also stated that in 2011 the ISC will conduct a full stock assessment for 
northern albacore tuna, and will recommend a new CMM for northern albacore tuna; in 2012 a 
full assessment for Pacific bluefin tuna will be undertaken, and additional CMMs for this stock 
considered. Swordfish stocks are in good condition; a full assessment will be done in 2013, and 
CMMs addressed at that time. The NC Chair referred to the NC voluntary fund commenting that 
NC members are expected to make contributions as agreed at NC6.  
151. WCPFC7 accepted the report of the Northern Committee and noted its programme 
of work.   
AGENDA  ITEM  7  -  TECHNICAL AND COMPLIANCE COMMITTEE 
7.1 
Report of the Sixth Regular Session of the Technical and Compliance Committee 
152. The Chair of the Technical and Compliance Committee, Noan Pokap, presented the 
Summary Report of the Sixth Technical and Compliance Committee meeting (TCC6), held in 
Palikir, Federated States of Micronesia from 30 September–5 October 2010. 
153. The following recommendations from TCC6 were approved by WCPFC7: 
i. 
On the ROP from the TCC report (TCC 6 report para 31),  
ii. 
For the release of ROP data (TCC 6 report para 35).   
iii. 
On data gaps and ROP efficiency (TCC 6 report para 42), 
iv. 
task the Secretariat to develop further work on SSPs relating to the Commission 
VMS in light of comments from CCMs, and in the context of the VMS security audit 
(TCC 6 report para 72), 
v. 
task the Executive Director to work with the IATTC on the on the IATTC/WCPFC 
overlap area.  
vi. 
Agreed that fees for non CCM flagged carriers and bunkers should be of $US 2,500 
per annum.   
154. Regarding the ROP, several CCMs noted that CMM 2007-01 is explicit about roles and 
responsibilities of various parties, including the Secretariat and observer coordinator, and 
suggested the coordinator should be empowered to progress issues that are highlighted in the 
ROP Annual Report, with reporting on specific issues to TCC7.  
155. WCPFC7 agreed that the Final ROP Audit Report be provided to the CCM involved, 
with notification only relayed to the TCC and Commission when a programme fully 
complied with the Commission standards.  
156. A CCM noted it could be helpful if reports from successful audits were made available on 
the secure portion of the WCPFC website as is the case of annual reports. 
27 
 
157. FFA members stressed the importance of data to the work of the Commission, for both 
science and compliance, and noted that several additional FFA members had provided 
authorisation to treat relevant national data held by them as Commission data under the ROP. The 
Parties to the FSM Arrangement and US Treaty will be asked to provide similar authority for 
release of data from those sub-regional programmes at their next annual meetings in early 2011. 
158. The EU stressed the importance of conducting an independent review of the Commission 
VMS, and noted paper WCPFC7-2010-DP-29, containing EU proposals addressing VMS audit 
TORs and cost savings. CCMs note the importance of conducting a broad, independent audit as 
soon as possible, and voiced support for integration of elements of the EU proposal into the TORs 
developed by the WCPFC and FFA secretariat.  
Operation of Commission VMS 
159. WCPFC7 tasked the Secretariat with incorporating significant elements from 
WCPFC7-2010-DP-29 into the draft VMS audit TORs and circulating the revised version to 
members for their review and approval, with a view to conducting an audit in the first 
quarter of 2011. 
160. Addressed under agenda item 9 
CMM 2007-03 Review of outstanding issues from WCPFC6 and operational issues 
161. Cook Islands noted that boarding parties rely heavily on language cards to assist in 
communication and ensure positive outcomes from their inspections.  Those language cards are 
now several years old; given the number of new measures agreed to by the Commission, they 
require update urgently. FFA members fully support the recommendation that the Commission 
Secretariat lead the process of updating the cards, and that CCMs participate actively in this 
review to ensure the accuracy of the information that is used, and to manage the cost of the 
process.  
Boarding and inspection 
162. WCPFC approved that the Secretariat prepare updated language cards for use in 
high seas boarding and inspections and requested that CCMs assist the Secretariat with the 
translation of the updated cards to manage the cost process. . 
163. WCPFC7 discussed the application by New Zealand for exemptions for particular purse- 
seine vessels under para. 26 of CMM 2009-06 (WCPFC-TCC6-2010/DP-02) and the 
recommendation made by TCC6 in its report (TCC 6 report para. 239) that such an exemption 
be granted. A CCM offered its interpretation that New Zealand could apply for a multi-year 
exemption under CMM 2009-06, and encouraged New Zealand to do so in the future. 
Transshipment  
164. WCPFC7 adopted New Zealand’s application for exemption under para. 26 of CMM 
2009-06 for 2011. 
7.1.1 
Update of Submission of Annual Reports Parts 1 and 2 
165. The Chair made reference to WCPFC7-2010-19 (Rev 1) on compliance by CCMs with Part 
1 and Part 2 reporting, and informed members that the Secretariat had received only 30 of the 35 
expected Part 1 annual reports, and 26 part 2 reports. He noted that the request made previously 
to simplify the Part 2 annual report formatting would be addressed under Agenda Item 7.2.5 
166. Palau, on behalf of FFA members, noted the growing burden of annual reports, and 
particularly the Part 2 reports, stressing that the limited capacity, time and resources available to 
small island administrations to compile, verify and complete these reports.  FFA members noted 
28 
 
that Part 2 reports to be submitted in 2011 will be even more onerous as they will include the 11 
CMMs that were agreed by WCPFC6.  On a more fundamental note, the information provided in 
the annual reports is not well suited for the primary purpose, which is to gauge implementation of 
CMMs. FFA members noted the close linkages between the streamlining of reports and agenda 
item 9.3.4 (proposed Compliance Monitoring Scheme (CMS)).   
 
167. WCPFC7 approved the template for Part 2 Reporting, as revised in WCPFC7-2010-
19 (Rev 1) (Attachment R), noting that work will be progressed during 2011 on a 
streamlined Part 2 Report (see agreement at para 229).  
7.1.2 
Update of CCM compliance with CMMs 
168. The WCPFC Compliance Manager, Peter Flewwelling, presented WCPF7-2010-20 (Rev 
1).  He highlighted: 
i. 
the complexity and delays in submission of Part 2 Annual Reports; 
ii. 
2009 fishing effort and catches compared to the 2000–2004 average or 2004 limit 
for bigeye and yellowfin tuna; 
iii. 
the lack of data on vessel numbers and catches for other large pelagic species. 
169. FFA members highlighted the importance of WCPF7-2010-20, as the only systematic 
documentation of CCM compliance with CMMs. Para. 27 of the paper reports that many CCMs 
have failed to provide operational catch and effort data as required under the Commission’s 
scientific data rules. FFA members stressed the apparent systematic overfishing in 2009 of the 
high seas purse seine limits in CMM 2008-01 (Table 2 (a) of Attachment 5 of WCPF7-2010-20), 
suggesting CCMs identified as overfishing their high seas effort limits should provide an 
explanation to the Commission. FFA Members further proposed that the Commission consider 
adopting the following elements into this proposed conservation measure. CCMs who are not 
providing operational-level catch and effort data to the Commission in accordance with 
requirements in the WCPFC data rules on scientific data should provide reasons in their Annual 
Report Part 2. Additionally those CCMs who have domestic legal constraints that are preventing 
them from providing operational-level catch and effort data to the Commission in accordance 
with WCPFC requirements should also provide information on steps they are undertaking to 
overcome these constraints. Other CCMs, who are also SPC members, that have not yet done so, 
should also provide information on the constraints and steps that they are undertaking to 
overcome these constraints that are preventing them from authorising SPC-OFP to provide to the 
Commission on their behalf operational level catch and effort data that CCMs are required to 
provide to the Commission  
170. Japan provided clarifications regarding data they had submitted to the Commission, noting 
that during 2009, Japan implemented the high seas alternative measure. Japan stressed that the 
objective of CMM 2008-01 was to reduce the catch of bigeye tuna, and that Japan reduced its 
bigeye tuna purse seine bycatch by 26%. Japan also noted the need to consider data quality and 
accuracy, and the potential for data to be used for scientific analyses such as CPUE series.  
171. The EU noted it has submitted a FAD management plan, which was not mentioned in the 
WCPF7-2010-20 (Rev 1). The EU said it was working with its members to satisfy its data 
commitments.  
172. Australia noted that attachments 2 and 3 of WCPF7-2010-20 omitted data contained in its 
Part 2 report. 
173. WCPFC7 acknowledged the importance of providing complete and accurate data in a 
timely way and urged CCMs to improve the provision of data to the Commission. WCPFC7 
29 
 
requested that CCMs that have issues in providing accurate and complete data in a timely 
manner should identify those issues clearly to the Commission. At TCC7 CCMs should 
provide a draft plan of how impairments to the provision of data will be dealt with as 
rapidly as possible. CCMs are encouraged to assist others as they are able to do so and the 
Commission should continue to evaluate methods to assist in this matter.   
7.2  Intersessional reports developed from TCC6 
7.2.1 
Cost Recovery Terms of Reference  
174. The USA was asked at TCC6 to facilitate a process to develop Cost Recovery TORs. 
TCC6 recommended that CCMs provide comments on the draft terms of reference (WCPFC-
TCC6-2010-35) to the USA (serving as coordinator of the small WG) by Oct 31 2010. Two 
CCMs provided comments. TCC6 requested that the coordinator provide a revised draft of the 
TORs to CCMs prior to WCPFC7 (provided as WCPFC7-2010-DP-21) so that the TORs could 
be considered by the FAC and the Commission. The TORs were amended during WCPFC7 on 
the basis of discussion and consultation.  
175. WCPFC 7 adopted the TORs for a consultancy study on optimization of WCPFC 
programme operational costs, including through cost recovery, as amended (WCPFC7-
2010-DP-21 (Rev 3)) (Attachment S).  
7.2.2 
IUU Vessel List for 2011 
176. WCPFC7 considered the Provisional IUU Vessel List prepared by TCC6.  
177. Regarding the Neptune, France reviewed that the Neptune, a Georgia-flagged vessel, was 
inspected twice in the port of Papeete. Log sheets show the Neptune was fishing in both WCPFC 
and IATTC Convention Areas, but was not on the WCPFC RFV. It had 160 mt of albacore 
onboard. Georgia was contacted in relation to this incident (15 June 2010) but did not respond.  
178. A CCM requested clarification on whether Georgia was obligated to enforce specific 
conditions required by WCPFC, given that Georgia is a party to UNCLOS, but not to the 1995 
HMFSA, or Commission.  
179. Dr Tsamenyi (WCPFC Legal Advisor) noted that the key issue was whether Georgia, not 
being a member or CNM, has any duties with respect of its vessels, and whether the vessel had 
violated any CMMs. He noted Georgia is a party to the United Nations Convention on the Law of 
the Sea, but not the UN Fish Stocks Agreement. As a party to the Law of the Sea Convention, 
Georgia has two specific obligations: cooperate to conserve and manage highly migratory fish 
stocks, and take measures to regulate the fishing activities of its nationals on the high seas. 
Georgia issued a high seas fishing license to the Neptune, which states the vessel should not fish 
in a manner that undermines international conservation and management measures. Dr. Tsamenyi 
noted that Georgia was not eligible to place its vessels on the RFV, and that its absence from the 
RFV might not be a valid cause for IUU fishing. He indicated the basic issue was whether the 
Neptune had fished in a manner that violates specific CMMs.   
180. France indicated that CMM 2007-03 requires there should be a prompt response by the flag 
State. Georgia failed to comply with CMM 2007-03. The Neptune was an otherwise unknown 
fishing vessel, operating in the WCPO without reporting its catch, and without cooperation by the 
flag State. France considered this is evidence of being engaged in activities that undermine the 
Convention and WCPFC CMMs, and thus maintained the Neptune should be placed on the 
WCPFC IUU list. 
181. New Zealand proposed the Secretariat write to all non-member flag registries explicitly 
seeking their cooperation with WCPFC, so that in future there will be a basis for saying WCPFC 
30 
 
has sought the cooperation of all States, and in addition, it can be determined if non-members are 
fulfilling their duty to cooperate.  They suggested also describing the WCPFC CNM process, and 
advocating using this process if they intend to fish in the Convention Area. 
182. The EU indicated the Neptune had been listed by IATTC in relation to the incident 
described by France, and noted that Georgia had responded in relation to another vessel but not 
the Neptune. Several CCMs joined the EU in supporting New Zealand’s suggestion as well as 
listing of the Neptune.  
183. In response to an inquiry, the Legal Adviser stated members can implement legislation to 
prosecute non-members caught fishing in their waters; their ability to extend such national 
legislation to address the high seas in the Convention Area was less clear.  
184. WCPFC7 agreed by consensus to list the Neptune on the WCPFC IUU Vessel List.  
185. Regarding the Fu Chun No 126, a Vanuatu-flagged vessel, it was noted at TCC6 that 
settlement negotiations were underway but an agreement had not yet been reached.  
186. New Zealand indicated a mutually satisfactory solution had been reached, and it no longer 
sought to pursue listing. New Zealand stated that considerable resources were required from both 
parties, and acknowledged Vanuatu for taking its flag-state responsibilities seriously. 
187. Vanuatu indicated the matter had been resolved, and indicated it had informed the vessel 
owner and company of the IUU activities, restricted the vessel to port in Suva, and appointed two 
independent investigators. An observer was placed on the vessel for six months, and a process 
invoked to prosecute the Fu Chun No 126 in the Vanuatu courts. Vanuatu acknowledged New 
Zealand for its cooperation and assistance in resolving the case, and thanked the vessel owner 
(located in Chinese Taipei) for their assistance.  
188. WCFPC7 agreed by consensus not to list the Fu Chun No 126 on the WPCFC IUU 
Vessel List.  
189. Regarding the Liao Da Gan Yu 55049, it was noted at TCC6 that settlement negotiations 
were underway but an agreement had not yet been reached. 
190. Solomon Islands indicated the matter had not been resolved to its satisfaction. 
191. China indicated that the Liao Da Gan Yu 55049 had operated in Solomon Islands for 3 
years under license, had paid an access fee to harvest for 2010, and had received an oral 
commitment from the Solomon Islands that the vessel could fish; a letter of comfort was granted 
two days after fishing activities began. In response to the incident the vessel was recalled to 
China and the license withdrawn for 3 months. China asked that the Liao Da Gan Yu 55049 not 
be listed, and that efforts to resolve the case be allowed to proceed intersessionally prior to TCC7. 
192. Tuvalu indicated that the Liao Da Gan Yu 55049 violated its national laws shortly after 
TCC6, and was arrested, but that the case had been settled. 
193. In response to a query from PNG, Solomon Islands confirmed that a license fee had been 
paid, and remained lodged with its central bank, but stressed that its procedures with respect to a 
development agreement had not been followed.  
194. PNG noted that someone in Solomon Islands must have directed the vessel owners how to 
pay the license fee, and issued the authority to fish. While sympathizing with the efforts by 
Solomon Islands to combat corruption, PNG stressed that Commission should not be used to 
address internal problems.  
195. New Zealand noted that TCC6 considered the facts carefully, made a recommendation to 
place the Liao Da Gan Yu 55049 on the provisional IUU list. From a procedural point of view, it 
31 
 
asked what new facts had been raised that affect the Commission’s position on the vessel; in the 
absence of new information, WCPFC7 may be undermining the process the Commission has 
established. 
196. Some CCMs encouraged the parties to work bilaterally to resolve the issue. Other CCMs 
supported listing, and commended Solomon Islands for bringing the issue to the Commission and 
confronting the issue of corruption.  
197. WCPFC7 failed to reach consensus and the Liao Da Gan Yu 55049 was not placed on 
the WCPFC IUU vessel list.   
 
198. The USA inspected the Fu Lien No 1 when it came into port to offload. It determined the 
Fu Lien No 1.was without nationality and had been fishing for WCPF covered spercies on the 
high seas of the Convention area. The vessel has since been reflagged by Georgia and continues 
to fish in the regions. 
199. Australia supported inclusion of the Fu Lien No 1 on the IUU list, as under CMM 2007-03 
vessels without nationality are presumed to have carried out IUU fishing. It asked how such a 
vessel could be removed once listed. 
200. The Legal Adviser noted that under CMM 2007-03 removal of a vessel must be initiated by 
the flag State. Georgia became the flag State after the incident in question, but it is the flag State 
at the time of the contravention that is responsible. He suggested it would be appropriate to 
include in the record a procedure to remove the Fu Lien No 1, or create an opportunity for the 
owner to remove the vessel, noting this was the first time this had arisen in the Commission. 
201. WCPFC7 agreed by consensus to place the Fu Lien No 1 on the WCPFC IUU vessel 
list. WCPFC7 additionally noted that the procedures for de-listing an IUU vessel under 
CMM 2007-03 require action by the flag State. However, in the case of the F/V Fu Lien No. 
1, it was listed for being without nationality and harvesting species covered by the WCPF 
Convention while on the high seas of the Convention Area. Therefore, the process for de-
listing the F/V Fu Lien No. 1 requires special arrangements. Accordingly, the Commission 
agreed: 
i. 
that the Secretariat will write to the vessel’s current flag State in order to seek its 
assistance in resolving this matter. The Commission further agrees that in the event 
that the current flag State of Georgia determines that this matter is outside its 
jurisdiction, then the following actions by the owner of the F/V Fu Lien No. 1 will be 
deemed sufficient for the purpose of removing the vessel from the IUU list. Those 
actions are:  
a. payment of voluntary contribution to the Commission in an amount deemed 
satisfactory by the Commission;  
b. ensuring that the vessel is flagged to a responsible flag State; and  
c. a written commitment by the vessel owner and flag State that it will comply 
with the WCPF Convention and its conservation and management 
measures. 
202. FSM informed WCPFC7 that the incident involving the Jinn Feng Tsair #1 had not yet 
been settled to its satisfaction as the vessel has not yet submitted to justice in the FSM and has not 
paid any penalty to the FSM. However, dialogue with the flag State, Chinese Taipei, continues 
and FSM looks forward to resolving this issue in the near future.  
203. Chinese Taipei committed to continuing to try to resolve the incident.  
32 
 
204. WCPFC7 agreed by consensus to retain the Jinn Feng Tsair No.1, the Senta and the 
Yu Fong 168 on the WCPFC IUU vessel list. 
205. WCPFC7 agreed that the Secretariat should write to all non-member countries’ flag 
registries seeking their cooperation with WCPFC management measures.  
7.2.3 KOBE II Workshop Recommendations on MCS and Management  
 
206. The ED introduced WCPFC7-2010-23, noting that two KOBE II meetings focused on 
Management and MCS in 2010.  The recommendations from these workshops were discussed and 
responses developed at SC6 and TCC6.  
207. FFA members recommended that the Commission adopt the recommendations from TCC6 
relating to the Kobe Management Workshop. FFA members provided detailed comments on 
specific recommendations, and voiced support for:  
i. 
defining and developing a list of “active” vessels, noting there are binding requirements, 
in CMM 2009-01, for flag States to advise the Commission each year of their active 
vessels; 
ii. 
considering a freeze on fishing capacity on a fishery by fishery basis that should not 
constrain the access to, development of, and benefit from sustainable tuna fisheries by 
developing coastal States, on the basis (a) that the sovereign rights of FFA members to 
determine who they will license in their waters and their right to participate in high seas 
fishing is recognized, and (b) the FAO definition of capacity, which is broader than 
vessel numbers alone;  
iii. 
developing a consistent, enforceable regime for sanctions and penalties to be applied to 
WCPFC members and non-members and their vessels that breach the rules and 
regulations developed and implemented by WCPFC (addressed by the proposed CMS 
proposed by Australia in WCPFC7-2010-DP-12); 
iv. 
developing management arrangements that provide tangible opportunities for the 
domestic fisheries development of SIDS and Territories, including participation in high 
seas fisheries, and complement FFA members’ initiatives to implement zone-based 
management arrangements;   
v. 
using the FAO definition of capacity “The amount of fish (or fishing effort) that can be 
produced over a period of time (e.g. a year or a fishing season) by a vessel or a fleet if 
fully utilised and for a given resource condition” until the Commission develops its own 
definition;   
vi. 
reviewing and developing management regimes, based inter alia on the concept of 
fishing rights, and including rights-based regimes that recognize the rights of coastal 
States over EEZs, and some special recognition of SIDS in high seas fisheries. 
vii. 
ensuring a constant exchange of information with tuna RFMOs;  
viii. 
establishing a joint tuna-RFMO technical working group to promote greater cooperation 
and coordination among RFMOs, and having the WCPFC Secretariat take a lead role in 
coordination of the working group between RFMOs.   
 
208. The EU noted its support for the Kobe process, and noted that a number of issues relating 
to the Kobe outcomes would be addressed under Agenda Items 7.2.4 and 9. 
209. WCPFC7 approved the recommendations contained in WCPFC7-2010-23.  
210. The USA noted that the Kobe III meeting will be held 11–15 July 2011 in La Jolla 
California, with pre-Kobe III workshops discussions on 11 and 15 January. The USA welcomes 
participation by Commissioners from all tuna RFMOs, and funds will be made available for 
travel costs for developing country participants. A steering committee has been established that 
33 
 
includes members from WCPFC CCMs, and a draft agenda will be posted in early 2011 at 
www.tuna-org.org. An information session will be held during the FAO COFI meeting in 
February; registration will be available in mid-January. The USA welcomes contributions from 
countries wishing to assist in supporting the workshop. 
7.2.4  CDS Scheme  
211. The EU proposed a CDS in paper WCPFC7-2010-DP-18, proposing a CMM to implement 
a CDS for bigeye, yellowfin and skipjack tuna and swordfish. It noted the proposal is intended to 
support implementation of CMMs, and reflects the scheme applied in the EU which can facilitate 
after adoption in WCPFC the replacement of the EU catch certificate with the WCPFC catch 
certificate. The scheme is applicable to the main target species in the WCPO, and could be 
expanded to additional species in the future. It also provides for a simplified catch certificate to 
cater for small vessels and reduce the related administrative burden. The validating authority is 
the flag State, which is a non-negotiable issue for the EU. The EU stressed the effectiveness of 
such a CDS in fighting IUU fishing.  
212. Japan noted that it presented a proposal of a CDS to the TCC6, which it requested remain 
under consideration. The Japanese proposal addresses skipjack taken by the purse seine fishery, 
and it authorizes port states to issue certificates. It also addresses shark as there are growing 
concerns in CITIES. PNG spoke on behalf of FFA members noting that at TCC6, the discussion 
on CDS was based around four papers presented by the EU, Japan, PNG and the WCPFC 
Secretariat. The outcome of that discussion was that FFA agreed to lead a working group to 
progress work on a WCPFC CDS guided by the four reports (proposal set forth in WCPFC7-2010 
DP-22). The paper includes a draft terms of reference with an outline of the operations of an 
intersessional working group, and a set of proposed guiding principles for the establishment of a 
WCPFC CDS. The process aims to develop a CDS that meets the aims of the four papers 
presented to TCC, and the interests of all Commission Members. The proposal reflects that the 
bulk of catches in the WCPO are made in the waters of developing coastal states.  
213. Korea supported the development of a CDS which is one of the most effective measures to 
prevent IUU fishing. It stressed the need to consider the cost effectiveness and practicability of a 
CDS, and said the system should be applied to major target species before extending to other 
species. Korea supported the EU on issuance and validation in the CDS, which should be 
responsibility of the flag State rather than the coastal State.  
214. Chinese Taipei supports the development of CDS in combating IUU fishing. It has applied 
voluntarily the CDS measure on pacific Bluefin Tuna as from 2010. Chinese Taipei supported the 
approach in WCPFC7-2010 DP-22, and noted the importance of considering cost-effectiveness.  
215. The Cook Islands spoke on behalf of FFA members and suggested a WCPFC CDS could 
broadly serve the three objectives in the MRAG paper provided to TCC6 (provide information to 
improve understanding of resources and fisheries, verify and validate catches to assist monitoring 
of compliance and deter IUU fishing, and trace from vessel to market in a way that serves the 
needs and interests of all those involved in the catching, trading, marketing and management 
processes). FFA members view a CDS as a component of an overall fisheries monitoring system, 
one that builds on, and adds value to existing monitoring systems including existing 
documentation schemes.   
216. The EU reiterated that flag States were under its legislation as well as under international 
legislation, the only entities able to control a vessel; provision for control by coastal or chartering 
States were not acceptable.  The EU introduced a statement on the matter (Attachment EE). 
34 
 
217. China supported the Japan and EU proposals, noting that China was the biggest exporter to 
the EU market. China noted difficulties in including shark species due to problems with 
identification, and the need to establish a DNA data bank. 
218. Several CCMs supported a CDS in principle, but indicated a CDS was just one aspect of 
broader monitoring and control measures. They stressed the need to focus primarily on species 
with significant IUU fishing and data problems and supported the proposal in WCPFC7-2010-
DP-22. 
219. The Marshall Islands spoke of behalf of FFA members and indicated that the approach 
sought to develop a CDS from first principles, as was done in development of the transshipment 
CMM, using a decentralized model that could cater for a range of different coastal State 
responses to market requirements.  It would also rely on some form of summary reporting from 
CCMs on catches in national waters covered by national CDSs. The effectiveness of such a de-
centralised CDS scheme would be in having a strong component of end-use reporting, to enable 
coastal States and the Commission to reconcile catches with market consumption.  
220. France expressed strong support for the EU CDS, as it is a powerful tool to fight IUU 
activities. It noted the importance of taking into account regional characteristics, and ensuring 
consistency between systems used in various RFMOs. 
221. Differing views were expressed by CCMs on the issue of flag State vs. coastal or 
chartering State responsibility with regard to catch documentation. Several CCMs noted that, 
while desirable, extension of a CDS to shark species should not be seen as a substitute for CMMs 
on sharks.  
222. One CCM noted that any CDS which does not cover all catches, including domestic 
landings, would not be acceptable.  CCMs also stressed the need for an open and transparent 
process, and compatibility with measures taken by other RFMOs.  
223. WCPFC7 agreed to form an intersessional CDS Working Group, to be coordinated 
by PNG, to progress work on an inclusive WCPFC CDS that includes flag, coastal and 
market States, and enables certification and export. It was agreed that the first consultation 
would involve the development of  Terms of Reference (TORs) for the CDS Working 
Group. 
7.2.5 Streamline Annual Report-Part 2 Report to WCPFC7 
224. The WCPFC Compliance Manager, Peter Flewwelling, presented WCPFC7-2010/25, 
containing general criteria provided to the Secretariat by a TCC6 small working group for 
streamlining the Annual Report – Part 2. The main criteria contained in the paper are:  
i. 
Cost effectiveness for CCMs and the Commission; 
ii. 
A clear role for the Secretariat;  
iii. 
Basing the reporting on fisheries management needs and priorities; 
iv. 
A reporting format that is flexible and relevant to individual CCMs, while retaining 
consistency; 
v. 
Efficiency – avoiding duplication and repetition; 
vi. 
Transparency (noting relevant data confidentiality rules);  
vii. 
Allows for effective monitoring of compliance with measures. 
225. The Compliance Manager suggested the Commission’s new Information Management 
System (IMS) could be used to streamline reporting, thereby allowing CCMs to focus on actual 
compliance with CMMs. In the future all CCMs would have access to enable them to track their 
reporting progress. He indicated initial costs could possibly be absorbed in the current budget.  
35 
 
226. CCMs commented on the desirability of streamlining the annual report, but several 
expressed concern with proposed costs associated with modification to the IMS, and possible 
associated costs that would have to be borne by developing CCMs in ensuring the compatibility 
of their IT systems.  
227. Several CCMs indicated that the most useful first step would to enable online input of Part 
2 annual reports, as outlined by the TCC recommendation, and sought confirmation this would be 
done in the first year. CCMs also asked for a breakdown of any associated costs, and suggested 
an IMS could be helpful in compliance monitoring.  
228. FFA members supported the ongoing work to review the Part 2 template, and the 
development of the IMS. They supported the Secretariat developing the work intersessionally, 
with subsequent review by the Commission. FFA members also suggested the budget for SIDS IT 
system testing should be increased, and noted required reporting by CCMs should be limited to 
the CMMs and Commission decisions of relevance to them. FFA members suggested several 
fishery categories to be included (longline fishery, purse seine fishery, pole and line fishery, or a 
combination of these), with CCM compliance performance under the relevant categories related 
to the status of the relevant fishery and stocks at a given time. They furthermore requested that 
automated reminders be sent out frequently (30 days, 14 days, 7 days and 3 days) prior to a 
reporting deadline. 
229. The Executive Director indicated the Secretariat would work intersessionally with any 
interested parties to further review and streamline the Part 2 reports. The Secretariat will report on 
the issue to WCPFC8.  
230. WCPFC7 noted the initiatives taken to streamline and automate reporting systems 
for the Part 2 Annual Reports and other Commission reporting processes. The WCPFC 
Secretariat was encouraged to work with interested CCMs during 2011 to further review 
and streamline the Part 2 reports mindful of SIDS IT constraints and the lack of budget. 
7.3  
Regional Observer Programme 
231. Karl Staisch (Observer Programme Coordinator) introduced WCPFC7-2010-26. He noted 
that most issues addressed in the paper were addressed under other agenda items, except: 
h) During analysis and checking of ROP observer data there may be indications that a 
vessel may have breached the CMMs of the Commission. However, there are no 
agreed procedures in place for the Secretariat to report to the flag states these 
breaches detected by ROP observers for the high seas.  
15. Detection of possible violations during ROP-observed Trips particularly during FAD 
Closure 
n) Vessel Flag States have requested copies of data collected by ROP observers, and 
clarification on what data should be released by the Commission data provider is 
required by the Secretariat and SPC. 
16. Data required by Vessel Flag States 
232. He noted that additional countries had agreed to allow data to be sent to the Secretariat 
from SPC, requested that CCMs coordinate with the Secretariat regarding ROP audits, and asked 
CCMs to provide data on catch retention and vessel discards.  
233. CCMs voiced support for the ROP noting its importance with respect to compliance and 
for collecting data for scientific analysis. CCMs discussed the process for approval of issues 
raised in the report, and suggested (i) that the Commission empower the ROP Coordinator to take 
action, in close coordination with the national and sub-regional observer programs, to address 
36 
 
technical issues, and report to TCC7 on progress; and (ii) focus Commission attention on higher-
level policy issues. The EU noted that the process needs to be transparent and that regular updates 
should be given to members through the ROP contact points or in the case of the EU through 
correspondence to the Head of Delegation to the WCPFC. Several CCMs also noted that some 
ROP-related issues would be discussed under separate agenda items.  
234. FFA members stated that there were a number of elements regarding the flow of ROP data 
that require additional clarifications, which is related to an issue in the ROP annual report about 
reporting on incidents. Actions are clear when they relate to alleged offences within the EEZ of 
the observer provider, but less clear in other cases. FFA members supported the recommendation 
from the Secretariat to develop guidelines about information flow and again look forward to 
reviewing outputs at TCC7. In addition, FFA members provided the following detailed 
comments: 
i. 
Data Management and Costs (recommendations (p) and (q)): support that data entry and 
management be undertaken by SPC in Noumea with support from FFA and relevant 
national programmes;   
ii. 
ROP Observers (recommendations (a) to (e)): support that the Secretariat prepare more 
formal advice on the issues raised for consideration at TCC7, noting that the Pacific 
Island Regional Fisheries Observer Standards that FFA-member national and sub-
regional observers are trained under are very well developed and adhered to.   
iii. 
Definitions and Standards (recommendation k): support that the issue be deferred until 
after the programme audits being undertaken by the Secretariat, while noting with great 
concern that the liberal interpretation of these terms by some CCMs and their flagged 
vessels has extended into activities within FFA-member waters.  FFA members noted 
some vessels are of the opinion that it is acceptable to carry an observer from their own 
national programme including when fishing in FFA EEZs; this constitutes a disregard of 
domestic legislation for most FFA members and will not be tolerated.  It is a significant 
undermining of the hybrid approach, which is the fundamental principle upon which the 
ROP is built.  FFA members sought the responsible cooperation of other CCMs to advise 
all vessels that when fishing in FFA EEZs observers must be sourced in accordance with 
the approved hybrid approach, sub-regional policy and national law. FFA members also 
noted they expect the highest degree of cooperation in prosecuting vessels that 
contravene this requirement.  FFA members suggested that before entering an EEZ, 
vessels be required to report the nationality of the observer on board.   
iv. 
Observer Reports (recommendation h): note that the responsibilities for provision of data 
and reports from ROP trips is less clear in the CMM than would have been desirable.  
Regarding the issues of how and when vessel operators would have access to observer 
reports, FFA members noted the issue should be part of the work undertaken by the 
Secretariat in accordance with the TCC6 recommendation for a report to improve 
efficiency of the ROP from both the observer and the vessel perspective, and be 
considered at TCC7. 
v. 
Observers for Special Situations (recommendations i and j): support the need for 
provision of this nature and discretion for the Executive Director to manage such “special 
situations”; budgetary provision for this activity should be considered by the FAC.  
vi. 
Data Required by Flag States (recommendation (t): rules and procedures for access to 
data are relatively clear in terms of the access that is provided to CCMs for non-public 
domain data relating to vessels flying their flag.  If needed, draft guidelines should be 
developed for consideration at TCC7 to address specific operational uncertainties. 
vii. 
ROP Working Group (recommendation (r):  Do not support the proposal for creation of a 
ROP-Technical and Operational Advisory Group (TOAG).  
 
37 
 
235. Japan noted that, since the issue of data access by operators and flag states are important 
both for scientific and monitoring purpose, discussion should not be postponed to the next 
Commission meeting but should be discussed at this meeting under Agenda 9. 
236. Korea noted the significant improvements related to compliance and implementation of 
CMMs through the operation of the ROP. They noted the ROP data indicated many infringements 
of the FAD closure and asked the Secretariat to provide more information. 
237. Concerns were raised over observer quality, debriefing standards, and regarding the 
behavior of crews and masters. 
238. China indicated an arrangement was needed for large-scale longline transshipment on the 
high seas, and observer cross-endorsement with IATTC. They also indicated that they had trained 
13 regional observers, who current have had no opportunity to work onboard vessels.    
239. The ED indicated that FFA members had rules in place regarding the use of FFA member-
based observers on their vessels, but that Chinese observers can work on vessels in the high seas. 
240. Chinese Taipei noted that that the data rules clearly indicate that flag States should have 
access to non-public domain data, and suggested there was no need to discuss guidelines.  
241. WCPFC7 reviewed and discussed  the report as presented, taking note of comments 
by members at TCC6 and WCPFC7 and  directed the Secretariat to undertake informal 
consultations as it proceeded to implement the recommendations made by TCC6, and to 
keep all CCMs informed of progress. 
7.4 
Vessel Monitoring System 
242. The ED indicated that issues raised in WCPFC7-2010-27 had largely been addressed at 
TCC6, or through recommendations adopted through the TCC6 report. He raised the issue of 
procedures and protocols for high seas monitoring and reporting anomalies.   
243. CCMs, including FFA members, voiced their broad agreement, and suggested providing 
the Secretariat with a mandate to move ahead on the issues, with the details to be discussed at 
TCC.  
244. Several specific issues of concern were raised: boundaries, which some CCMs sought to 
have published on the WCPFC website, the VMS audit (addressed under Agenda Item 7.1), and 
the need for coastal States to be informed by the Commission when potentially relevant 
infringements occur in their jurisdiction, as well as the responsible Flag State. The EU suggested 
it would be useful to have information on the WCPFC website about actual grey areas where 
boundaries are not yet defined. 
245. The Chair noted that boundary determination is beyond the mandate of the Commission, 
and suggested the Commission direct the Secretariat to provide a link on its website to the UN 
website, to simplify access by CCMs to that information. 
246.  WCPFC7 noted WCPFC7-2010/27 and its content, and directed the Secretariat to 
provide a link on its website to facilitate access to boundary information on the UN website.  
7.5 
Programme of work for the Technical and Compliance Committee 2011–2013 
247. The TCC Chair presented WCPFC7-2010-28.  
248. A CCM discussed the need, when adopting new CMMs, to consider the work requirements 
of TCC and other subsidiary bodies, and the potential additional costs to the Secretariat noting 
that the work programme determined by TCC6 could be impacted by decisions taken by 
WCPFC7.  
38 
 
249. WCPFC7 approved the TCC work programme subject to the budget report, and with 
the understanding that the programme may be expanded to include some other items as 
decisions are made at WCPFC7. 
250. Two CCMs addressed the issue of how CCMs are referenced in the report. It was agreed 
that the Secretariat would examined the report and make any needed changes to ensure 
consistency with the precedent established over the previous 7 years.  
Adoption of the TCC6 Summary Report. 
251. WCPFC7 noted the TCC6 Summary Report. 
AGENDA  ITEM  8  -  AD HOC TASK GROUP — DATA 
252. The coordinator of the Ad Hoc Task Group (AHTG) — Data, Holly Koehler (USA), 
provided a brief report on the work of the AHTG during 2010 noting that WCPFC6 agreed that 
the work of the AHTG-Data should continue on an ad hoc basis with an initial focus at TCC6 on 
considering the issue of data provision by chartered vessels.TCC6 recommended to WCPFC7 that 
the AHWG-Data should also consider:  
i. 
 the right of chartering states to access data; 
ii. 
that the process for data release takes into account the right of the chartering state with 
respect of data it has provided for chartered vessels. 
253. The coordinator also noted the Secretariat paper WCPFC7-2010-29. The Secretariat noted 
that no work was undertaken on attribution of catches under charter arrangements but the 
consultant (Gillett, Preston and Associates) is expected to provide a preliminary report on the 
subject by mid-December 2010. On behalf of FFA Members, the Marshall Islands requested 
correction of two items in WCPFC7-2010-29:  
i. 
The statement in WCPFC7-2010-29, para 1 (that WCPFC6 agreed that the work of the 
AHTG Data should include the issue of attribution of catches under charter 
arrangements) is incorrect.  The WCPFC6 discussion on the future scope of work of the 
AHTG (paras. 189 and 190 of the WCPFC6 report) does not mention catch attribution. 
ii. 
The scope of work for the AHTG (WCPFC7-2010-29, para 5) does not accurately reflect 
the discussion at TCC6 and the recommendation of TCC6 on this matter. At TCC, the 
AHTG Chair asked for clarification of the request to WCPFC6 by FFA members for 
further work by the AHTG.  In response, the Marshall Islands spoke on behalf of FFA 
members and pointed out a gap in the Commission rules on access to non-public domain 
data by chartering CCMs. The two sets of rules governing access to data are clear about 
the rights of flag States, coastal States and port States to access Commission data, but do 
not consider the rights of chartering States to access Commission data, which is a gap that 
needs to be addressed. In addition, the rules require the consent of the source of data for 
certain data releases. For some datasets, it may not be clear whether the data involved has 
been provided by the flag State or the chartering State. FFA members want to ensure that 
rights of the chartering State in respect of data that it has provided for chartered vessels 
are properly taken into account in the ‘consent process’ for data release. As a result, it 
was recommended in para 54 of the TCC6 report that the AHTG-Data should consider 
the two items in WCPFC7-2010-29 5b) and 5c). TCC6 did not recommend that the 
AHTG-Data should consider the broader issue of data provision by chartered vessels 
referred to in WCPFC7-2010-29 5a).  
254. The FFA members offered to provide a brief paper on the issues of the right of chartering 
states to access data, and the process for taking into account the right of chartering states with 
39 
 
respect of data it has provided for chartered vessels as a starting point for the work of the AHTG 
Data on these issues. 
255. WCPFC7 noted WCPFC7-2010-29, while acknowledging the corrections provided by 
the Marshall Islands in para. 253 above. It was agreed the AHTG-Data would continue its 
intersessional work on the items identified in para 252 above, and report to TCC7. 
AGENDA  ITEM  9  -  CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT MEASURES 
9.1 
CMMs listed for discussion at TCC6 and requiring further discussion 
9.1.1 
CMM 2007-03 — IUU Listing and Removal 
256. The USA introduced WCPFC7-2010-DP-16, containing proposed amendments to 
procedures for applying para. 3(j) of CMM 2007-03 for the IUU vessel list. This paper took into 
account comments that had been provided intersessionally since TCC6 by two CCMs.  
(i) Amendments to para. 3(j) procedures  
257. Fiji on behalf of FFA members noted concerns regarding risks associated with the proposal, 
including the impact on domestic processing plants supplied by vessels under common ownership. 
FFA members also noted that it remains very difficult to determine “common ownership”, 
indicating vessels are already owned via shelf or shell companies, subsidiaries, trading names etc 
and the adoption of these procedures and application of 3(j) is expected to raise the complexity of 
corporate structures and ownership.  
258. Working on the margins of WCPFC7, the USA developed revised text to address these 
concerns. In response CCMs expressed their support for the procedures, which will be annexed to 
CMM 2007-03 while noting the following: 
i. 
Marshall Islands noted their intention to propose a “deeming procedure” in the future to 
address remaining ownership concerns; 
ii. 
the EU noted the potential for para. 11 to serve as a loophole; and 
iii. 
New Zealand indicated its desire to develop mechanisms to address control (as distinct 
from ownership) of vessels. 
 
259. The Chair noted that 3(j) is part of CMM 2007-03, and that the Commission would issue a 
revision to 2007-03, including a revision of the timelines (see para 268 below), and with the 3(j) 
procedures in WCPFC7-2010-DP-16 (Rev 1) appended as an attachment. 
260. WCPFC7 adopted procedures related to para. 3(j) of CMM 2007-03 as set forth in 
WCPFC7-2010-DP-16 (Rev 1) (Attachment T). 
261. Tonga introduced WCPFC7-2010-DP-11, proposing amendments to para. 15 of CMM 
2007-03 with the intent of (i) distinguishing between fishing violations that occur in a coastal 
State’s waters and those that occur on the high seas, (ii) requiring that fishing violations that 
occur in a coastal State’s waters be resolved to the satisfaction of that coastal State, and (iii) 
affirming the sovereignty and the exercise of sovereign rights of the coastal State. 
(ii) Amendments to paras. 15 and 25 
262. Several CCMs stated they could not support the amendment.  
263. FFA members voiced their support, and noted that the Convention Area differs from that of 
other RFMOs, due to including the EEZs of many Pacific Island countries. Several FFA members 
related problems they had experienced with IUU fishing vessels, stressing that the current 
paragraph did not effectively address situations where a vessel had fled their jurisdiction.  
40 
 
264. The EU has tabled a proposal by adding the coastal states in para 15 c) of CMM 2007-03 
as follows…..”the case regarding the vessel or vessels that conducted IUU fishing activities has 
been settled to the satisfaction of the CCM that originally submitted the vessel for listing, of the 
Coastal State (if different from the former) and of the flag State involved”. 
265. The Chair summarized the issues, noting that if violations take place in an EEZ, and the 
vessel leaves, and the flag State does not take adequate measures, then the coastal State has no 
recourse. He suggested members develop a mechanism to get flag States to take action to punish 
violations in a way that is commensurate with the violation.  
266. Tonga, on behalf of FFA members, thanked members who participated in the discussion, 
and proposed that the Commission revisit the decision taken by WCPFC5 with regard to 
application of IUU conservation and management measures: “WCPFC5 agreed that further 
development of guidelines for how the Commission should consider and assess the adequacy of 
any actions taken, or sanctions imposed, in relation to CMM 2007-03 should be a priority work 
item and referred the matter to TCC5. It was noted that work on a control of national measures 
may inform this process” (WCPFC5 Report, para 161).  FFA members noted that the TCC5 
summary report contains no evidence the issue was considered, and urged that the decision be 
revisited and TCC7 be directed as a matter of priority to consider the matter, and consider the 
issues in para 157 of the WCPFC5 report.  
267. WCPFC7 directed TCC7 to satisfy the following request made by WCPFC5: 
“WCPFC5 agreed that further development of guidelines for how the Commission should 
consider and assess the adequacy of any actions taken, or sanctions imposed, in relation to 
CMM 2007-03 should be a priority work item and referred the matter to TCC5.” It was 
noted that work on a control of national’s measure may inform this process.  
268. New Zealand introduced WCPFC7-2010-DP-05, which is the result of intersessional work 
from TCC6 on the issue of the 120-day rule in CMM 2007-03. The paper includes a summary 
from New Zealand, and a comparative table of dates and suggestions received from Japan, 
Chinese Taipei and FFA members for consideration by WCPFC7.  
(iii) 120-day rule 
269. CCMs voiced support for the measure, with Japan noting the difficulty it experienced in 
proposing a vessel for IUU listing in 2010 because of the timing restriction. FSM, on behalf of 
FFA members, indicated their interest in pursuing an intersessional listing process in the future.  
270. WCPFC7 adopted WCPFC7-2010-DP-05 amending the 120-day rule in CMM 2007-
03 to the 70 day rule (Attachment U). 
9.1.2 
CMM 2008-01 — para 46 Extension of CMM 2008-01 and others 
271. The Philippines introduced WCPFC7-2010-DP-01, recommending (a) thorough 
consideration and discussion of the extension of closures of high seas pockets 1 and 2; (b) 
designation of high seas pocket 1 as a special management area for small and medium fresh/ice-
chilled fishing vessels; (c) implementation of  proportionate reduction of fishing effort (reduction 
of national fleet capacity); and (d) implementation of proportionate bigeye tuna catch limits for 
all fleets (purse seine, longline, etc). 
(i) High seas pockets special management area 
272. CCMs expressed sympathy with the socioeconomic difficulties faced by the Philippines, 
and noted the importance of reducing the impacts of fishing in the western tropical areas of the 
WCPO to ensure stock sustainability.  
273. Several CCMs voiced support for the request by the Philippines to establish a special 
management area, noting the vital role played by such fisheries in local communities. Other 
41 
 
CCMs noted that WCPFC7-2010-15. Rev 1 made it clear that the closure of high seas pockets 
provided no conservation benefit, with purse-seine effort about 10% higher than the previous 
record level in 2008-2009, and voiced support for review of CMM 2008-01 in its entirety by 
WCPFC7. FFA Members stated they were not able to support the proposal to amend CMM 2008-
01 as proposed by the Philippines at WCPFC7, and did not support a comprehensive review of 
CMM 2008-01 by WCPFC7, but welcomed consideration of the Philippines proposal as part of a 
review of CMM 2008-01 in 2011. 
274. The Philippines further introduced WCPFC7-2010-DP-24, containing a proposed 
amendment to CMM 2008-01, and proposed DP-24 serve as a working paper for discussion by 
the proposed WG on CMM 2008-01. The Philippines informed the Commission that there was an 
understanding between the Philippines and PNA countries to have further discussions on the high 
seas pockets special management area as soon as possible to work out arrangements for remedial 
measures to be implemented in early 2011. 
275. The Marshall Islands on behalf of the PNA stated “ Some PNA parties have met informally 
with the Philippines delegation on the issue of the High Seas pockets access. We sympathise with 
their situation domestically and note the many commonalities with Philippines, Indonesia and 
PNA parties in the areas of domestic capacity, aspirations and the impact of conservation 
measures on our domestic industries.  
276. Mr Chairman, we wish it to be noted that in the new year PNA, and we would hope 
broader FFA, will work closely with the Philippines government and industry to come to 
amicable solutions to this without undermining the measures in place”. 
277. WCPFC7 noted the agreement reached between the Philippines and the PNA to 
further discuss the proposal and if possible present a mutually agreeable solution to the 
Commission intersessionally. WCPFC7 agreed to also consider WCPFC7-2010-DP-01 and 
WCPFC7-2010-DP-24 as part of the CMM 2008-01 review process (para.  308, below). 
278. Japan spoke to WCPFC7-2010-DP-02, proposing a new CMM addressing purse seine 
fishing capacity and effort, explaining it was an emergency step to stop the increase in purse 
seiner catch during 2011, while the Commission considers revision of CMM 2008-01. Japan 
commented that in their view:  
(ii) Preliminary Analysis of Purse Seine Increase 
i. 
the unforeseen expansion of purse seine fishing activities while other fishing activities 
decline. Purse seine effort increased 30%–40% over the last 3 years, the inverse of the 
expected reduction in fishing effort over 2008–2011. The bigeye tuna catch by purse 
seine fleet increased by 40%, while longline catch decreased by 20%, and will decrease 
by a further 10% in 2011. Japan noted the situation created under  CMM 2008-01 was 
unfair.  
ii. 
Japan believes that the scientific analysis indicates bigeye tuna are in trouble, yellowfin is 
close, and skipjack is declining rapidly. The skipjack analysis was based on 2009 data, 
and the situation may be worse in 2011. Japan noted the purse seine catch of skipjack 
exceeded 1 million mt in 2002, and reached 1.6 million mt in 2010, a 60% increase over 
8 years. The rapid increase in purse seine skipjack catch reflects a rapid increase in the 
activities of purse seine fishing vessels. 
iii. 
Japan noted that the Convention calls for application of an ecosystem and precautionary 
approach, but that current fishing operations were in direct opposition to that approach. 
Japan stated that the rapid increase in fishing activities causes difficulties for coastal 
fishing operations, and noted clear declines in coastal waters. 
42 
 
iv. 
Japan warned the Commission that actions were being taken by members to promote 
their own interests, with almost no corrective action taken in timely manner. It noted 
investors were looking for opportunities to build large US$20 million purse seine vessels, 
and seeking short term profits; the ensuing struggle between members prevents 
Commission members from stopping the uncontrolled increase in the fishing cap.  
v. 
Japan noted its strong support for Pacific Island development and protection of small-
scale sustainable fisheries, noting significant reduction in its own long linefleet, and 
urged members to halt the introduction of additional purse seine vessels to the 
Convention Area, except for replacement of existing vessels.  
vi. 
Japan noted that coastal states should decide who should fish and how much in their 
waters. If coastal states want to increase their own fleet then they have to exclude distant 
water fishing nations from their zones. Coastal states have to show their strong will to 
control fishing in their zones. Unfortunately current situation is like a too crowded bus 
passengers are coming and coming but nobody is getting off.  
279. China thanked Japan, and stated that it encouraged its industry to establish processing 
plants, and reflag its vessels to PICs. China noted that a number of vessels were planned or under 
construction, and could not be halted by China’s national legislation or WCPFC CMMs; such 
pressures would place additional pressure on bigeye and skipjack stocks. China agreed with Japan 
to ban any growth in the purse seine fleet in the Convention Area. 
280. The EU voiced support for the Japanese proposal, noting the EU had maintained its effort 
at the same level for many years, and Japan’s proposal was an emergency measure that would be 
added to other elements. 
281. The Philippines noted that it had a moratorium on new fishing vessels in place since 1998, 
with new vessels allowed only to replace existing larger or equivalent vessels.  
282. Palau speaking on behalf of FFA members noted they remained committed to basing the 
management of the tropical purse seine fishery on effort limits through the PNA Vessel Day 
Scheme, and indicated interest in the scope for a system of purse seine capacity limits to 
complement and support the VDS, and indicated they would consider Japan’s proposal in their 
work during 2011 on measures to replace CMM 2008-01. 
283. The USA supported Japan’s proposal, and further noted that capacity should be reduced, 
through work by the Commission that identifies a proper level of purse seine capacity, and 
respects the aspirations of SIDS through reductions in distant water fishing nation (DWFN) 
capacity. 
284. France supported limits on capacity and the entry of new vessels.  
285. Korea noted its support for the general concept in principle, but emphasized that better 
techniques were needed for reducing the bigeye tuna purse-seine catch through CMM 2008-01, 
rather than through limits on capacity that would affect skipjack and yellowfin catches, which it 
viewed as stable. Korea advocated implementing limits on SIDS gradually, to allow them to 
develop their fisheries and capacity. 
286. Nauru spoke on behalf of the PNA and noted that capacity limits had been used by the 
PNA for many years, but were considered to be a very blunt tool; the PNA instituted effort limit 
instead to provide more control over who fishes in their waters. It noted that any scheme should 
not limit the rights of coastal states to choose and should complement more advanced limit 
approaches.  
287. Marshall Islands agreed with Nauru, and stated that PNA would impose tighter control of 
its VDS in 2011. It urged developed members to undertake voluntary capacity reduction. 
43 
 
288. FFA members stated that they assumed that under para 1 the high seas capacity limit in 
para 3 would not apply to SIDS’ domestic purse-seine development, and would enable SIDS to 
participate in the high seas purse seine fishery. They agreed with Japan that greater attention be 
given to skipjack management in accordance with SC advice, and noted they were considering 
additional measures to complement the VDS, potentially including purse seine capacity limits 
289. Guam supported the proposal by Japan, and asked that CCMs recognize the importance of 
fish stocks to SIDS communities and the role of artisanal fisheries as they were striving to 
maximize the economic benefits of the fishery. It noted the poor state of fish stocks in Guam.  
290. Canada noted it shared concerns with the overcapacity of the purse-seine fleet in the 
WCPO. In the Kobe II workshop efforts were made to include language on capacity, and such a 
freeze should not constrain access to fisheries by developing states. Canada noted that the 
Japanese proposal was long overdue, and expressed the hope that members would agree to a 
significantly strengthened measure to replace CMM 2008-01 in 2011. 
291. PNG stated that DWFNs should cut their effort. 
292. New Zealand shared the concerns raised by Japan, and noted the results of the most recent 
skipjack stock assessment. It stated it would be difficult to reduce capacity if it increases further, 
but observed that Japan’s proposal lacked the flexibility called for by the PNA and FFA.   
293. Japan voiced appreciation for the support expressed by members, and expressed 
willingness to work with FFA to implement effort or capacity controls in conjunction with PNA 
measures, while urging the Commission to agree to the principle of implementing a fishing effort 
or capacity cap. 
294. Nauru stated it was committed to halting or reversing the expansion of purse seine capacity, 
but that PNA members would not agree to freeze capacity in its current balance, in which most 
vessels are from DWFN. 
295. Chinese Taipei noted that CMM 2008-01 was effective for longliners, but not for purse 
seine vessels, and urged all delegates to consider how to more effectively conserve bigeye tuna. It 
advocated an interim freeze, and introduction of a comprehensive replacement of CMM 2008-01 
in 2011. 
296. The Cook Islands, on behalf of FFA members, reiterated their support for capacity fishery 
limits that do not constrain access to, development of, and benefits from sustainable tuna fisheries 
by developing countries, on the basis that FFA members’ sovereign rights to determine who they 
will license in their waters and their right to participate in high seas fishing are recognized. They 
also noted the FAO definition of capacity, which was endorsed by the WCPFC: “The amount of 
fish (or fishing effort) that can be produced over a period of time (e.g. a year or a fishing season) 
by a vessel or a fleet if fully utilized and for a given resource condition.” 
297. Samoa thanked Japan for its proposal, noting FFA members supported the development by 
DWFNs of proposals that complement actions taken by SIDS in their EEZs. 
298. A number of CCMs indicated they had vessels under construction or in the planning stage. 
Several FFA members noted that some CCMs have suggested that all new builds need prior 
approval by Commission members. Those FFA members noted that actions taken by the 
Commission or its members must not impact or limit development of their fisheries, including 
building new vessels. It was noted by the Chair that Resolution 2008-01, Article 30 of the 
Convention and various SIDS provisions in individual CMMs make it clear that there is no need 
for Commission approval and in fact provide an obligation on members to commit to assisting 
SIDS develop their fisheries.  
44 
 
299. A lengthy discussion focused on the continuation of elements of CMM 2008-01 beyond 
2011 if no agreement was reached on a replacement The USA reminded the Commission of a 
decision taken by TCC6 (TCC 6 report para 234) that recommends that such a decision be made. 
At TCC differing views were expressed on the meaning of para 46 of CMM 2008-01. The USA 
stated its view that CMM 2008-01 should persist if not replaced.  
300. The Legal Adviser stated that CMM 2008-01 required annual review, but would remain in 
place unless an alternate measure is adopted. The overall measure will not expire, but there are 
specific time-bound actions. Thus specific provisions on purse seine measures and longline 
measures are time-bound, with some set for 2009, and others for 2010 and 2011. Those actions 
would terminate as indicated in 2011. One measure relating to the high seas closure will not 
expire, because of a paragraph at the end indicating it will continue after a review in 2009. 
301. FFA Members stated they were committed to adopt a comprehensive CMM at WCPFC8 to 
replace CMM 2008-01, but urged the Commission to take a decision that all the provisions of the 
CMM will continue to apply, as they apply in 2011, until they are replaced to avoid a situation in 
2011 where partial arrangements would continue to apply in an unfair or ineffective manner. FFA 
members also noted that CMM 2008-01 (para 36) states that the catch limit for China for 2009 
and 2010 will remain at 2004 levels pending agreement being reached to develop an arrangement 
for the attribution of Chinese catch taken as part of domestic fisheries in the EEZs of SIDS. The 
paragraph is silent about any limit for China for 2011, but in the view of FFA members 
anticipates that the Commission will establish a bigeye longline catch limit for China for 2011 
consistent with the 30% reductions being applied to the catch limits of other large longline fleets. 
FFA estimates the bigeye catch by Chinese longline vessels operating as part of the domestic 
fleets of several SIDS in 2004 at 1,824 mt; the limit established for China for 2009 and 2010 in 
Attachment F of CMM 2008-01 was 9,314 mt. Thus the applicable baseline catch for China 
would have been 7,490 mt; with a 30% reduction the limit for China for 2011 would be 5,243 mt. 
FFA members noted it was appropriate that a reduction be applied to the catch limit for China for 
2011 because the difficulty with establishing an appropriate catch limit arises from the failure of 
China to provide operational level data as required under the Commission’s Data Rules.   
302. China noted the need to consider the issue with FFA. 
303. The Philippines noted it would be premature to consider an extension of CMM 2008-01 
without a review, and noted that Article 46 states that decisions must be taken in light of scientific 
advice. 
304. Nauru noted its reservations regarding a piecemeal management through various CMMs, 
and urged the Commission to develop a strategic approach to management; it also suggested that 
work on reference points should be fast-tracked.  
305. Several CCMs agreed CMM 2008-01 needs improvement, with ambiguities removed and 
effectiveness reinforced, and noted some 80% of the bigeye catch in the WCPO is in national 
waters, and only 20% in the high seas.  
306. The Chair stated that the concerns expressed by Japan were backed by analyses of the 
Scientific Services Provider. He noted that the proposed or ongoing construction of some 40 new 
purse-seine vessels, all larger than those that are currently fishing now, posed a significant 
problem. He reviewed the declining status of available resources, and noted that — having failed 
to reduce the purse seine catch — the Commission’s credibility was at stake, and it needed to take 
urgent measures to address the situation for specific stocks. He noted PNA attempts to reduce 
effort through the VDS, but observed that regional capacity was already sufficient, and efforts 
must be made to limit overall capacity in conjunction with managing effort. He observed that 
further delay would result in construction of additional vessels and increased fishing effort, with 
45 
 
likely increases in IUU fishing on the high seas if in-zone fishing is controlled. He noted the need 
to transfer capacity from DWFNs to SIDS, and reminded members of their responsibility to 
promote sustainable use of the region’s fishery resources through a precautionary approach.  
307. WCPFC7 agreed to consider WCPFC7-2010-DP-02, WCPFC7-2010-DP-03 and the 
issues raised during the discussion through the “CMM 2008-01 review process” described 
in para.  308 below.  
308. WCPFC7 adopted WCPFC7-2010-DP-32 (Rev 3), regarding a process for 2011 to 
develop an enhanced conservation and management measure for tropical tunas (bigeye, 
skipjack and yellowfin) in the WCPO (Attachment V), as follows: 
i. 
At its 8th session in December 2011, the Commission will adopt an enhanced 
measure to conserve and manage tropical tunas on the basis of the advice provided 
by SC7 and the recommendations of TCC7.  The CMM will be based upon the most 
recent scientific advice, and be designed to deliver a substantial improvement in the 
status of the WCPO bigeye stock, and promote the conservation and management of 
skipjack and yellowfin in accordance with the WCPF Convention. 
ii. 
The CMM will apply to all commercial tuna fisheries (purse seine, longline and 
other commercial tuna fisheries) in the WCPO.   
iii. 
The advice and recommendations will, inter alia, include consideration of the status 
and distribution of stocks, fairness, equity, enforceability, compatibility, multi-
species effects, socio-economic factors involved and the special requirements of 
developing members, SIDS and territories.    
iv. 
CCMs are encouraged to take voluntary steps to mitigate the impact of their fishing 
activities on the sustainability of bigeye, skipjack and yellowfin tuna and to report 
back on the steps they take.   
v. 
Kobe 3 (11-15 July 2011) may present an opportunity for an initial discussion on the 
development of an enhanced measure for conservation and management of tropical 
tunas.   
vi. 
SC7 shall consider updated assessments for bigeye, yellowfin and skipjack and the 
results of the evaluation of the measure and projections undertaken at the request of 
SC6, and will provide advice and recommendations that will support the 
development of an enhanced measure for conservation and management of tropical 
tunas. On the basis of the advice provided by SC7, the Chair and the Vice-chair of 
the Commission, assisted by the Executive Director and other Commission 
subsidiary body Chairs as appropriate, will prepare a preliminary document 
containing a possible approach and options for the enhanced measure to be 
considered by TCC7. 
vii. 
TCC7 will consider the preliminary document prepared by the Chair and Vice-
Chair and provide advice and recommendations, for consideration by WCPFC8. 
viii. 
All CCMs are encouraged to share proposals with other CCMs and with the 
Commission Chair as early as possible in 2011, to maximize the opportunity for 
developing options for an enhanced measure for consideration at WCPFC8.  
ix. 
CCMs are encouraged to reflect on Resolution 2008-01 in the preparation of 
proposals for an enhanced measure.  
9.1.3 
CMM 2009-06 — Conservation and Management Measure on the Regulation of 
Transshipment  
309. The Compliance Manager summarized the questions that the Secretariat had received 
regarding implementation of CMM 2009-06. These include: confusion regarding the observer 
provisions and lack of clarity of where to submit the  transshipment declarations.  
46 
 
310. Solomon Islands on behalf of the FFA stated that CMM 2009-06 needs to be read in 
conjunction with 2009-01- WCPFC Record of Fishing Vessels and Authorization to Fish. CMM 
2009-01 indicates in para. 30 that once a CNM vessel is on the vessel register, it is equivalent to a 
CCM-flagged vessel, and must comply with all relevant CMM’s. Thus the transshipment 
observer provisions of CMM 2009-06 apply to carriers on the interim register.  
311. In accordance with CMM 2007-01 and the decision of WCPFC2, carriers, like other 
vessels, are free to choose ROP observers of non nationals of the flag state from the authorized 
national observer programs, or from the existing sub-regional programs, except for vessels 
covered by para 14 (ii) of CMM 2007-01. FFA members noted that if a bunker vessel did receive 
fish from another vessel, it would be a “receiving vessel” and therefore subject to 2009-06 the 
whole measure in the same way that other vessels are. FFA members also noted that the reporting 
requirements of the measure (in paras. 10, 11 and 12) also apply in cases where WCPO-caught 
fish is transshipped elsewhere.   
312. Japan noted while, who is responsible for funding is an issue to be addressed, practical 
approach can be taken in operations because no transshipment can be allowed without observers 
on board.  
313. China noted the urgent need to allocate funds to pay observers and resolve proposals for 
cross-endorsement of observers.  
314. The USA and FFA members stated that CMM 2009-06 could be implemented without 
further clarification, while the EU stated that the measure was not clear. The Chair advised the 
USA to provide clarification to the EU. 
315.  Noting that they were already in force, the Commission agreed with the Executive 
Director’s suggestion that the issues raised by WCPFC7-2010-13 and WCPFC7-2010-30 be 
addressed intersessionally and brought to TCC7 to ensure consistent application.  
9.1.4 
CMM 2007-04 — Seabird By-Catch Mitigation 
316. ACAP advised CCMs that considerable progress had been made in recent years in respect 
to mitigation of longline impacts on seabirds. He indicated that ACAP hoped a new set of 
guidelines on mitigation measures would be available in 2011, and noted progress on safety 
aspects of using leads on branch lines, which should result in much safer operations. ACAP 
sought support for having these items reviewed by the SC at its next meeting.  
317. ACAP commented that there had been numerous references to the lack of data hampering 
the Commission’s work, and said that a similar lack of data on seabird bycatch hampered 
ACAP’s ability to advise the Commission. ACAP noted that the ecological risk assessments 
presented and discussed at the SC over the previous few years enabled the Commission to 
undertake a very targeted observer programme that focused on areas of highest seabird interaction 
and need. ACAP proposed that a targeted observer programme be undertaken in one of the hot 
spots identified in the Tasman Sea to assist in the review of CMM 2007-04, and indicated it 
would consult with relevant parties who fish in that region in the coming months to identify data 
gaps, and develop approaches to cooperation.  
318. New Zealand stated that the approach of a targeted observer programme as proposed by 
ACAP could be very cost effective and useful, and indicated this could be further considered by 
the Commission at TCC and SC. It encouraged other fishing nations to get involved.  
319. The USA suggested that the design of the ROP should be guided by advice from the SC, 
and should work to implement the plan proposed by the SC and agreed to by the Commission. 
9.1.5 
Others to be discussed 
47 
 
CMM 2005-02 — South Pacific Albacore 
320. PNG introduced WCPFC7-2010-DP-08 on behalf of FFA Members, requesting that CMM 
2005-02 be clarified and require that CCMs report to the Commission the total number of vessels 
that caught South Pacific albacore, and the total catch in tonnes for vessels catching albacore 
south of 20°S.   
321. A number of CCMs expressed support for the proposal. Some concerns were expressed 
about reporting thresholds for South Pacific albacore bycatch, and for application of the measure 
to vessels that do not target south Pacific albacore.  
322. WCPFC7 adopted WCPFC7-2010-DP-08 (rev 1) to revise CMM 2005-02 (Attachment 
W) with the understanding that some CMMs may not be able to provide separate data for 
bycatch and targeted catch of South Pacific albacore prior to 2005. CCMs shall make their 
best efforts to do so, and post 2005 catch data for South Pacific albacore must distinguish 
between targeted catch and bycatch.  
CMM 2007-01 — Regional Observer Programme 
323. The Secretariat spoke to the data flow obligations of CCMs under CMM 2007-01, as 
addressed in WCPFC7-2010-13.  It noted that the poor provision of ROP data to the Secretariat 
and its Scientific Services Provider (SPC) negatively impacts the Commission’s ability to carry 
out its work and receive appropriate reports for sustainable and responsible fisheries 
management. There is a need to clarify the definition of the ROP and the obligations of Members 
with respect to the security and timely flow of data to both the Secretariat and SPC, with a 
mechanism to assist members who have difficulties meeting the ROP data criteria. 
CCM data flow obligations 
324. Japan introduced WCPFC7-2010-DP-19 on behalf of the EU, Japan, Korea and Chinese 
Taipei, in relation to release of ROP reports. They proposed that Annex A of CMM 2007-01 be 
modified, and specify that observer providers be responsible for ensuring (i) timely provision of 
draft observer reports to vessel operators/captains as well as to the competent authority in the flag 
CCM upon completion of their observer trips, and (ii) the opportunity for vessel 
operators/captains to review and comment on the observer reports under paragraph 1.c), Annex 
B.” They noted that the data was very useful for compliance as well as scientific research, and 
this would be facilitated through the proposed modification to CMM 2007-01.  
ROP report release 
325. Some CCMs indicated that the issues raised needed to be considered further to determine 
their impact on observers and national observer programs, and suggested the proposal be deferred 
to TCC7. Other CCMs noted the proposal was essentially a guideline for existing para 1(c) of 
Annex B implementation, and could be implemented without delay, stressing the need for flag 
States to receive observer reports as soon as possible in order to be able to exercise their duty of 
responsible control over own flagged vessels. One CCM stressed the need to set forth the rights 
and responsibilities of the various parties more clearly, and another indicated the information 
would be useful should legal action be required. A CCM noted the proposed paragraph should 
indicate why the competent authority should receive the observer report, and noted it should be 
made available to all those who should receive it at the same time.  
326. The Observer Programme Coordinator indicated that there were operational difficulties 
raised by the proposal, highlighting costs, reporting delays due to travel delays, the possible need 
for observer debriefing, and problems that could arise if an observer made multiple trips on the 
same vessel.  
48 
 
327. He also noted that the Secretariat was currently receiving no data, and that no funds were 
available to enter data in 2010.  
328. FFA noted that there were significant differences between ROP data and observer reports, 
and that captains were able to review but not keep observer reports, while Flag states could 
receive ROP data. 
329. The EU confirmed not having been able to access any observer data and that masters of EU 
flagged vessels had never received reports for review. 
330. WCPFC7 failed to reach consensus on WCPFC7-2010-DP-19, and directed TCC7 to 
consider the issues raised in the paper.  
 
CMM 2007-02 — VMS 
331. The USA introduced WCPFC7-2010-DP-14, regarding the need for Commission 
consideration and approval of requests by CCMs to include waters under their national 
jurisdiction within the area covered by the Commission VMS, as specified in CMM 2007-02, 
para. 6(c). The USA outlined its concern that such requests and approvals were characterized in 
the WCPFC6 meeting record as being a bilateral issue, while CMM 2007-02 is clear that they 
require Commission consideration and approval; the USA stressed that CMMs should be 
implemented in the specified manner. 
 
332. The USA suggested that the Commission approve the application of CMM 2007-02 to all 
CCMs’ waters as a whole if requested by a CCM. The Secretariat would advise the Commission 
if a request was made by a CCM for application of the VMS to its waters. A proposed template of 
terms and conditions would be developed by the Secretariat for this purpose.  
333. In response to a query, the Compliance Manager indicated that the VMS currently collects 
data regarding EEZs, and the Commission pays for that data, but the data is quarantined, and 
countries and the Commission do not see it. The proposed access arrangement would enable 
members to see data of Commission vessels in their EEZ. There would be costs associated with 
data access only if a member requested an increase in the polling rate for vessels. He noted that of 
the approximately 1,500 vessels registered exclusively on the Commission VMS, only 20%-30% 
are on high seas; about 70% are in member EEZs, but that data is not visible, despite being paid 
for by the Commission. 
334. China noted that for some coastal states maritime boundaries have not been finalized, and 
suggested a conflict could occur if several Commission members asked that their EEZs be 
included, and those did not agree on the boundaries. The Chair noted that language could be 
added to the effect that exercise of the Commission VMS would neither determine disputed 
boundaries nor prejudice the establishment of maritime boundaries of states. 
335. WCPFC7 adopted WCPFC7-2010-DP-27 (Rev 1) (Attachment X), while noting that 
the inclusion of waters under the national jurisdiction of a member of the Commission 
within the area covered by the Commission VMS will not determine any disputed boundary 
and will be without prejudice to the final determination of such boundaries. 
CMM 2009-06 — Transshipment 
336. Discussed under agenda item 7.1 and Item 9.1.3.    
9.2 
Report by PNA Members on implementation of the Vessel Day Scheme 
337. Marshall Islands presented WCPFC7-2010-DP-23 (Rev 1), on implementation of the 
Vessel Day Scheme. 
49 
 
338. In response to a query, Marshall Islands indicated that 8 PNA members had amalgamated 
their zones to the VDS. Implementation and monitoring is undertaken in conjunction with the 
FFA, using the VMS to monitor all fleets in PNA waters. All bilateral agreements are taken into 
account in the VDS. In the future tighter control will be exercised with fewer vessel days. The 
VDS includes domestic vessels under the FSM arrangement.  
339. New Zealand commended the PNA for its report, for the forecast operational 
improvements, implementation of fixed limits, and restrictions on the transfer of days between 
management years. 
340. The EU suggested that future reports could address the effectiveness of VMS 
implementation on conservation of tropical tuna stocks. 
341. The Marshall Island noted this could be addressed by SPC, and that future limits would 
remove some effort, or 15%-20% of vessels. 
342. PNG stressed that the PNA had additional measures under its third implementing 
arrangements, and was the first to achieve 100% observer and VMS coverage. It noted that in 
2011 PNG was spending $1 million per year on its observer programme, and building a web-
based VMS.  
343. WCPFC7 noted the Report by PNA Members on implementation of the Vessel Day 
Scheme 
9.3 
Consideration of new measures and other conservation requirements 
9.3.1 
North Pacific Striped Marlin 
344. PNG, in its capacity as chair of the FFC, and on behalf of FFA members, introduced 
WCPFC7-2010-DP-07, which proposes a CMM calling for a phased reduction by all CCMs in 
their longline catch of North Pacific striped marlin, such that their annual catches starting from 1 
January 2013 are 80% of their highest annual catches between 2000–2003. 
345. Japan, speaking on behalf of the northern Asian countries, supported the proposal.  
346. The USA noted its concern that members would take as their allowable catch 80% of the 
highest level in the reference period, which could increase the average catch overall, relative to 
the reference period, meaning the measure would have little if any  conservation benefit. It asked 
for confirmation on this from SPC. It noted declines in striped marlin catch, and the expected 
availability in 2011 of a stock assessment for striped marlin. The USA expressed its support for a 
measure for 1 year, with consideration of a revised CMM when the stock assessment results are 
available.  
347. Several CCMs supported the position taken by the USA.   
348. A CCM voiced support for passage of the measure, noting that not all CCMs were likely to 
catch their full allocation. It indicated the measure was designed around percentage reductions, 
and could be easily revised on the basis of a stock assessment. 
349. Dr. John Hampton (SPC) noted total catch had declined quite rapidly since the early 2000s. 
The allocations to members under the measure would allow a total catch of some 2,400 mt, 
somewhat higher than the current level. Reducing the catch relative to recent yearswould 
necessitate using a more recent base year or increasing the percentage reduction.  
350. Following further discussion CCMs agreed to a measure for North pacific Striped marlin 
subject to the text including consideration of the following proposed amendments:  
i. 
the measure will be amended in 2011 on the basis of the 2011 stock assessment results;  
50 
 
ii. 
the measure will eliminate references to fishing using longline gear and apply to all gear 
types; 
iii. 
the measure will call for a 10% reduction in 2011, 15% in 2012, 20% in 2013 and beyond 
subject to amendment in 2011;  
iv. 
members will be encouraged to implement and test gear modifications that may assist 
with reduction of north Pacific striped marlin catch and inform amendment of the 
measure in 2011.  
351. WCPFC7 adopted WCPFC7-2010-DP-07 Rev 2 as amended as a CMM (CMM 2010-
01) (Attachment Y). 
9.3.2 
Port State Measures 
352. The EU introduced WCPFC7-2010-DP-13, proposing a new CMM intended to prevent, 
deter and eliminate IUU fishing through the implementation of effective port State measures 
(PSM) to control the harvest of fish caught in the WCPF Convention Area. The EU noted it had 
received various comments from members on an earlier draft presented to TCC6 and 
intersessionally.  
353. Fiji and Niue on behalf of FFA members thanked the EU and indicated the revised CMM 
took into account the concerns raised regarding the protection of the sovereignty of the port State 
and the exercise of sovereign rights over EEZs.  They noted the significant implications for 
national institutions and resources, and the effects that capacity and resource constraints can have 
on implementation of port State measures, and sought clarity regarding the provision of financial 
and other assistance. They noted their view that a PSM should not apply to (i) foreign fishing 
vessels already licensed by the relevant port State CCM; and (ii) vessels fishing solely in waters 
under the sovereignty of the relevant port State CCM.  
354. France strongly supported the PSM as a tool to combat IUU fishing, stating that most 
notifications come from inspections in the ports in their territories. Another CMM also 
commented on the effectiveness of PSMs in combating and eliminating IUU fishing. 
355. The Chair stated that there are a number of CMMs that had been adopted that refer to port 
state responsibilities, which must all be reconciled. He observed that the EU proposal 
incorporated the essence of the FAO Port State Agreement, which had been agreed to by the 
broader international community, into a WCPFC CMM, and noted the need to address: (i) 
possible discordance between the proposal and existing WCPFC CMMs; (ii) exemptions for 
certain kinds of vessels; (iii) costs borne by CCMs; (iv) differences in definitions (e.g. what 
constitutes “fishing” and “fishing related activities”).  
356. The EU noted that the PSM proposal contains specific references to funding to support 
implementation capacities of SIDS. Some flexibility would be possible to adjust the proposal to 
the specific regional context. But there are some fundamental basic principles that stem from the 
PSM Agreement adopted by consensus at FAO and those cannot be modified. The EU agreed to 
progress the work intersessionally, while being faithful to what was achieved through the FAO 
process. 
357. WCPFC7 directed TCC7 to consider the issue of Port State Measures, and any 
progress made intersessionally by the EU and other CCMs on the issue.  
9.3.3 
Eastern High Seas Pocket Special Management Area- 
 
358. Cook Islands introduced (i) WCPFC7-2010-DP-04, proposing a new CMM intended to 
reduce IUU fishing in the eastern high seas pocket of the Convention Area, including through 
specific vessel reporting requirements and provision of near real-time VMS information related to 
51 
 
the eastern high seas pocket to adjacent coastal states/territories for monitoring purposes, and (ii) 
WCPFC7-2010-IP-07, supporting the proposal in DP-04.  
359. Several CCMs strongly supported the proposal by Cook Islands, noting their concern with 
what is happening in this area, where there is significant fishing effort. They noted fleets must 
transit through coastal State waters, leaving those waters vulnerable to IUU fishing activities, and 
that it was essential to develop additional MCS tools, such as that proposed by the Cook Islands. 
One CCM further noted that poaching was occurring in many other areas as well, including 
targeting of sharks by small longline vessels, and proposed application of the measure to high 
seas areas adjacent to EEZ areas.  
360. FFA members supported the proposal, noting that the role of high seas pockets as a haven 
for IUU fishing and as a base for incursions into EEZs had been discussed repeatedly, and that the 
measure addressed the specific objective of enhancing MCS opportunities without overly 
impacting upon vessels legitimately fishing in the eastern high seas pocket. They indicated that 
the additional requirements were not onerous and represent a practical solution to an issue that 
has resulted in significant losses to the neighboring coastal States, which include two SIDS and 
one Territory. 
361. One CCM supported the proposal in principle but called for further consideration of a ban 
on transshipment in the area, and indicated they would need precise coordinates for the area 
attached to the CMM if adopted. Another CCM did not support the proposal, indicating concern 
that the request would interfere with freedom of navigation and the high seas as enjoyed by all 
members, and noted there was no justification to require notification by all fishing vessels prior to 
entry. It expressed concern that enforcement of such a measure would require significant human 
resources on the part of the Commission and flag CCMs.  
362. Several CCMs suggested the proposal by Cook Islands be put in place and monitored for 
effectiveness prior to extension to other areas. It was noted that the VMS programme could be 
used more widely by members in this regard, and that a provision allowed VMS data to be made 
available within 100 miles outside the EEZ of a coastal state on request to the Secretariat.  
363. New Zealand supported the proposal as a very effective mechanism for combating IUU 
fishing while still allowing legitimate fishing to occur. New Zealand stated it spends considerable 
funds in air surveillance, including in this area, and conducts patrol activities, and that activities 
in the eastern high seas pocket place a burden on members seeking to manage the area 
effectively. It suggested examining the expansion proposal at TCC7. 
364. A CCM voiced the concern that that it was difficult for vessels to report operational plans 
12 and 6 hours before arrival and departure, and proposed modifying the reporting time frame. It 
also suggested that CMM 2009-06 effectively addresses transshipment.  
365. Japan noted that at present without flag State permission coastal states could not use VMS 
data in the buffer zone (a 100-nautical mile area extending from the outer limit of the EEZ up to 
100 nautical miles into the high seas). It indicated it had significant difficulties with poaching, 
particularly by small longline vessels targeting sharks and other species. Japan supported a strong 
measure to monitor activities in the buffer zone.  
366. Marshall Islands supported the proposed measure, and noted that the area is closed to purse 
seine activities as a condition of access to vessels licensed to fish in PNA waters.  
367. Chinese Taipei stated that the Commission VMS provided near real-time data for vessels 
entering and leaving EEZs, and that use of the VMS data would provide the needed information 
without the proposed additional reporting, which would be a burden on fishing vessels. 
52 
 
368. The Philippines noted the similarity between the proposals by Cook Islands and that made 
by the Philippines and asked for support for its proposal for a special management area in the 
western closed high seas pocket No. 1. 
369. Following further discussion and amendment, the Commission adopted the measure, noting 
that the extension of the Special Management Area to buffer zones would be revisited by TCC7.  
370. WCPFC7 adopted WCPFC7-2010-DP-04 (rev 1) as a CMM (CMM 2010-02) 
(Attachment Z), and directed TCC7 to consider extension of the Special Management Area 
to buffer zones. 
9.3.4 
Committee on Compliance with Conservation Measures 
371. Australia introduced WCPFC7-2010-DP-12, proposing a new CMM to implement a 
compliance monitoring scheme (CMS). At WCPFC6, the Commission approved Australia’s 
proposal to convene intersessional discussions on a CMS through the Compliance with 
Conservation and Management Measures (CCMM) Working Group, in accordance with TORs in 
WCPFC6-2009-DP-17. In 2010, Australia developed a working paper outlining options for a 
structure and process for the Compliance Monitoring Scheme (WCPFC-TCC6-2010-21) which 
was circulated to the CCMM Working Group, and discussed at TCC6; the latter recommended 
that the Commission continue to progress work on the CMS through the CCMM Working Group, 
with Australia to lead the process and develop a draft CMM for WCPFC7 consideration. 
Australia noted that the structure and process of the CMS in the draft CMM is based on the 
principles and graduated approach described in WCPFC-TCC6-2010-21 and discussed at TCC6, 
and based on the framework adopted by the Commission in 2006; and that the proposed CMS 
builds on existing structures and processes in place in the Commission.  
372. Following initial discussion at WCPFC7, Australia presented a revised version as 
WCPFC7-2010-DP-28 (rev 2). 
373. Fiji on behalf of the FFA members noted their full support for the Australian proposal.  
374. Most CCMs voiced support for the proposal, with some concern expressed over (i) 
increased workload on the Secretariat, which could be addressed through an IMS or similar 
means; and (ii) the reliability of information from NGOs, and problems that could arise from 
allowing NGO participation as proposed in the CCMM CMM. One CCM suggested adopting a 
phased approach to implementation. 
375. The Chair summarized the discussion and acknowledged that involvement by NGOs was a 
delicate issue. He reflected on his past experience in various committees and governance bodies 
and suggested that the benefits of allowing interested parties to make information available 
outweighed the drawbacks. He noted that NGOs ultimately did not make decisions in bodies such 
as the Commission, but that they could submit very constructive suggestions, and allowing NGOs 
to make contributions could diffuse many problems; he cited the effectiveness of this approach in 
development of the UN Fish Stocks Agreement.  
376. The Commission requested Australia to continue to work intersessionally through the 
Compliance with Conservation and Management Measures Working Group to develop a process 
that will identify a range of possible responses to non-compliance (as provided in paragraph 23 of 
CMM 2010-03), and report to TCC7.  
377. WCPFC7 adopted WCPFC7-2010-DP-28 (Rev 2) as CMM 2010-03 (Attachment AA). 
 
 
 
53 
 
9.3.5 
Pacific Bluefin Tuna 
378. Japan, on behalf of the NC, introduced WCPFC7-2010-35, proposing a new CMM to 
replace the existing one, seeking to ensure that the level of Pacific bluefin tuna fishing mortality 
does not increase above 2002–2004 levels.  
379. CCMs discussed WCPFC7-2010-35, One CCM with domestic fisheries for the stock 
expressed difficulty to withdraw its reservation made in the NC meeting in September. Concern 
was expressed that failure to adopt a new CMM could result in CITES listing of Pacific bluefin, 
as was proposed for Atlantic bluefin in 2010. FFA members noted their desire to see the stock 
assessment of Pacific bluefin reviewed in full by the SC. FFA members also indicated that in the 
event that the proposed CMM failed to meet the objective of reducing fishing mortality to 2002–
2004 levels, the need for stringent alternative measures — such as direct control of catches, 
particularly of juvenile fish — be noted when the measure is reviewed in 2012. Northern 
Committee meetings were held twice at the margin of the Commission meeting and finally 
reached consensus on measures as WCPFC-2010-35 (Rev1). 
380. WCPFC7 adopted WCPFC7-2010-35 (Rev. 1) as a CMM (CMM 2010-04) 
(Attachment BB).  
381. Japan noted that Mexico was a CNM and also fishes for Pacific bluefin tuna. It indicated 
that the NC intends to establish a joint working group or hold a meeting with IATTC on Pacific 
bluefin tuna, prior to NC7, to pursue development of a management measure for the eastern 
Pacific. 
9.3.6 
Large-Scale Purse Seine Fishing Capacity and Effort 
382. Discussed under agenda item 9.1.2 (ii).   
9.3.7 
Closure of Additional Purse Seine Areas 
383. Marshall Islands, on behalf of the PNA, introduced WCPFC7-2010-DP-06, proposing a 
new CMM that would close all high seas areas located within 10°N and 20°S latitude and 170°E 
and 150°W longitude, including those already closed to purse seine fishing by virtue of para. 22 
of CMM 2008-01, to all purse seine fishing from 2011 onwards. They noted concern about the 
transfer of effort to the east with the closure of western high seas pockets, particularly if elNino 
conditions were experienced in the next few years, which have traditionally seen a shift of effort 
into these areas where bigeye catch is known to be significantly higher than in western areas. .  
384. A number of CCMs, including FFA and PNA members, supported the proposal as 
complementary to actions taken by the PNA with respect to high seas closures for vessels 
licensed to fish in PNA waters.  
385. Several CCMs opposed the measure. It was noted by individual CCMs that (i) high seas 
closures were not effective; (ii) WCPFC-2010-15 (Rev. 1) indicated that removal of exemptions 
and exclusions in CMM 2008-01 was the most effective means of reducing catch of juvenile 
bigeye; and (iii) with implementation of CMM 2008-01, effort had shifted to EEZs, necessitating 
a reduction in capacity or effort.  
386. Kiribati voiced its general support, but also raised concerns regarding the proposal’s 
economic impact, noting there are 3 high seas areas between its island groups. It asked that the 
measure’s economic impacts be assessed. 
387. WCPFC7 noted PNA members have already agreed to implement the closure of the 
additional high seas areas located within 10N and 20S latitude and 150W longitude to purse 
seiners that are licensed to fish in the waters of PNA from 1 January 2011. WCPFC7 agreed 
54 
 
that the proposal in WCPFC7-2010-DP-06 be further considered through the “CMM 2008-
01 review process” set forth under 9.1.2 (ii), para.  308 (above). 
9.3.8 
Prohibition of Purse Seine Fishing Associated with Whale Sharks and Mitigating 
Impact of Fishing on Cetaceans 
388. Australia on behalf of FFA members, introduced (i) WCPFC7-2010-DP-09, proposing a 
CMM to prohibit purse seine fishing associated with whale sharks; and on behalf of Australia and 
New Zealand introduced (ii) WCPFC7-2010-DP-17, proposing a CMM to mitigate fishing 
impacts on all cetaceans through a prohibition on knowingly setting purse seine nets around 
cetaceans, whether alive or dead, and requiring that specific steps be taken should a cetacean be 
encircled. Australia noted that both measures derived from observations made during periods of 
increased observer coverage as a result of the FAD closure.  
389. Japan spoke on behalf of the six Asian CCMs, noting they could not support the 
prohibition on setting on whale sharks, as this was an established traditional practice by their 
fishermen, and the measure would be difficult to enforce. Japan stated that cetacean interactions 
with the Japanese purse seine fleet were rare, and noted the need to consider what CMMs are 
applied by IATTC in the overlap area.. It stated that cetaceans were a sensitive issue for the 
Japanese government, and asked to defer the discussion to WCPFC8.  
390. In relation to WCPFC7-2010-DP-09, Japan on behalf of the 6 Asian CCMs indicated that 
they would support the proposal if paragraphs 1-4 were removed. These paragraphs prohibit the 
setting of nets on whale sharks and, if they were removed, only the paragraphs referring to the 
steps to be taken in the event of a whale shark being inadvertently encircled would remain. FFA 
members did not accept this change, stating doing so would fundamentally alter the measure. 
391. Several CCMs voiced support in principle for the proposals, and indicated that their laws 
prohibited setting on marine mammals and referring to WCPFC7-2010-IP-01 which indicates that 
intentional and unintentional encirclement of both cetaceans and whale sharks do occur in the 
fishery, resulting in a degree of mortality. 
392.  FFA members noted the vulnerability of whale sharks to fishing pressure and stated that 
they deserved extra protection from the Commission, and that the language used in the measure 
was consistent with provisions for release of sea turtles in CMM 2008-03. 
393. Greenpeace noted its support for the proposals and indicated it would undertake market 
engagement work in support of the measures.  
394. One CCM indicated the proposal on cetaceans should be dealt with by the International 
Whaling Commission, and not by the Commission. 
395. Several CCMs stressed that the Convention provided the Commission the mandate to adopt 
measures mandating conservation of non-target and associated species, as already undertaken 
through measures on seabirds and turtles.  
396. Australia noted that best practice guidelines for the safe handling and release of encircled 
animals should be considered by SC7. The USA emphasized that in developing these best 
practices the Commission consult closely with industry.  
397. The Commission noted the PNA members have agreed to adopt measures to mitigate 
the impacts of purse seine fishing on whale sharks, including banning setting on whale 
sharks from 1 Jan 2011 in their waters. The Commission took note of the advice in 
WCPFC7-2010-IP-01, which highlighted that there are incidental and inadvertent 
interactions with whale sharks and cetaceans in purse-seine sets.  The Commission 
requested SC7 to develop best practice guidelines for the safe release and handling of 
encircled animals and advise on practical ways to make these available to fishing vessels, for 
55 
 
consideration by WCPFC8, taking note that the safety of the vessel crew will also be fully 
considered. These best practice guidelines should be guided by collaborative research 
between the SC, TCC and industry. The use of ROP reports and experience of senior ROP 
observers should be considered in seeking practical, cost-effective mitigation procedures.  
398. The Commission agreed to address the issues raised by WCPFC7-2010-DP-09 and 
WCPFC7-2010-DP-17 at SC7, TCC7, and WCPFC8.  
9.3.9 
Implementation of the ROP for Fresh-fish Fishing Vessels North of 20°N 
399. Japan, on behalf of NC, introduced WCPFC7-2010-36, proposing a CMM setting forth 
requirements for implementation of the ROP for fresh-fish, fishing vessels north of 20°N latitude.  
i. 
FFA members raised several concerns, including:  
ii. 
their own domestic longline vessels will be subject to a minimum 5% observer coverage 
rate by 2012, and they  are unwilling to accept final observer requirements for northern 
vessels that differ from the conditions imposed on other longline vessels; 
iii. 
provisions of the proposal allow the NC to issue further exemptions from observer 
coverage until the end of 2018, potentially allowing a large number of vessels a 5.5-year  
window, and transferring a disproportionate conservation burden onto SIDS; 
iv. 
considering specific and individual applications is well beyond the mandate of the NC 
under the Convention rules of procedure and CMM 2007-01.  Any exemption 
applications would have to be considered by the TCC and the Commission, not the NC; 
v. 
there are no criteria that CCMs would have to meet or satisfy in order to apply for an 
exemption, and no guidance to the TCC and Commission in considering these 
applications, meaning that every vessel could apply and there would be no grounds to 
refuse applications; 
vi. 
provisions in the measure appear to provide permission for vessels to carry observers 
from their flag State, which is directly inconsistent with the hybrid approach upon which 
the ROP is built. FFA members acknowledge that there is ongoing disagreement about 
the terms “principally” and “occasionally”, but the proposed language goes far beyond 
that and provides blanket authority to carry an “own observer”. 
 
400. Japan, on behalf of the NC, agreed to reconsider the proposal.  
401. WCPFC7 directed the NC to submit a revised recommended CMM on 
implementation of the ROP for fresh-fish fishing vessels north of 20°N to TCC7 for 
consideration. 
9.3.10 Implementation of an EEZ Entry and Exit Notification Scheme 
402. France introduced WCPFC7-2010-DP-15, proposing a CMM to establish an EEZ entry and 
exit notification scheme. France noted the proposal aims to add a reporting scheme when entering 
and exiting an EEZ, would not add a large burden to vessels and states, and does not limit right of 
passage.  
403. A number of CCMs voiced support for the proposal, and noted it complemented the 
proposal by Cook Islands (WCPFC7-2010-DP-04, under agenda item 9.3.3).  
404. Several CCMs opposed the proposal, noting the right of innocent passage was established 
under UNCLOS, and suggested it could be addressed through national legislation. 
405. FFA members indicated the proposal complemented some measures already put in place 
and stated the CMM would greatly assist their efforts to monitor waters under national 
jurisdictions. FFA members have compulsory reporting requirements under their Harmonised 
Minimum Terms and Conditions of Access, and are amending national legislation to make it 
56 
 
compulsory for non-licensed fishing vessels to report to national surveillance authorities when 
transiting waters under national jurisdictions. FFA members also proposed that vessels be 
required to notify the nationality of the observer onboard when providing entry notifications 
under the measure. 
406. In response to a query regarding the Commission’s mandate to require entry and exit 
reporting into areas of national jurisdiction, the Legal Adviser stated that all areas involved were 
within the Convention Area, and thus MCS measures could be applied to both the high seas and 
EEZs.  He noted that many countries already require entry and exit notification as part of fisheries 
jurisdiction under international law, and the proposal would apply this to all Commission 
members.  
407. Several CCMs suggested members could use the Commission VMS to address many of the 
concerns raised. Other CCMs raised concerns that a VMS could not be used to give prior notice 
of entry or exit, unless a buffer arrangement through the 2009 high seas MCS data rules was in 
place that would enable this. 
408. France agreed that the Commission VMS could be used to address the issue, but noted only 
three members had asked for inclusion of their EEZs inside the VMS, meaning there are large 
parts of the Convention Area where vessels can transit without notification. France noted it was 
possible to address at the national level, but more effective if done using a multilateral approach. 
France tabled WCPFC7-2010-DP-15 (rev 3), which sought to address a number of the concerns 
raised.  
409. In the course of ffurther discussion, some members reiterated their support for, and others 
their opposition to, the proposal.  
410. WCPFC directed TCC7 to consider the proposal in WCPFC7-2010-DP-15 (Rev 3), 
and to provide recommendations to WCPFC8. 
9.3.11 Mitigating Fishing Impacts on Cetaceans 
411. Discussed under agenda item 9.3.8.    
9.3.12 Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS) 
412. Discussed under agenda item 7.2.4.    
EU proposal 
413. Discussed under agenda item 7.2.4.    
FFA members CDS guiding principles and working group TORS 
9.3.13 Prohibition of Night Setting During the FAD Closure 
414. Korea introduced WCPFC7-2010-DP-20, proposing a CMM to prohibit night setting 
during FAD closures, with the intent of ensuring FAD closures are effective in avoiding juvenile 
bigeye catches, and minimizing the impact of FAD closures on skipjack. Korea’s proposal also 
required fishers to release fish when any object not identified by the observer onboard nor the 
master before a set was conducted is inadvertently encircled in the purse seine net, and would 
allow fishers to continue operations in cases when objects not previously identified by the 
observer onboard or the master are found drifting around a purse seine net while the net is being 
retrieved. 
415. Japan spoke on behalf of Asian countries except Korea, and stated they could not agree to 
the proposal because they had concerns that the proposal would create additional loophole and 
make implementation difficult at sea. .  
57 
 
416. FFA members noted their support for a ban on night setting to improve the effectiveness of 
the FAD closure, but did not support the proposal for greater flexibility with respect to daylight 
sets due to concerns that the greater flexibility would allow abuse of the FAD closure, and the 
need to give further consideration to how the proposed approach will be effectively monitored by 
observers.  FFA members (i) voiced interest in ensuring that the FAD closure is not unnecessarily 
burdensome for vessel operators, (ii) hoped it would be possible to develop appropriate 
procedures to ensure that the approach proposed by Korea to deal with inadvertent circling of 
floating objects can be effectively applied and monitored, and (iii) sought to work with other 
CCMs, including Korea, in testing the proposed approach.    
417. Kiribati supported previous interventions by FFA members and noted that the economics 
of the purse seine fishery are very important to Kiribati because of the large contribution of purse 
seining to government revenue and the domestic economy. They supported the idea of studying 
more closely how Korea’s proposed approach could be made to work in practice without putting 
unwelcome pressure on observers. 
418. WCPFC7 agreed to include consideration of the proposal in WCPFC7-2010-DP-20 in 
the CMM 2008-01 review process (addressed under 9.1.2, para. 308).  
9.3.14 CMM for Tropical Tunas in the Convention Area  
419. The EU introduced WCPFC7-2010-DP-26, proposing a new CMM related to CMM 2008-
01, calling for replacement of the FAD closure with a full closure of purse seine fishing during 1 
July – 30 September. The EU made reference to discussion that occurred under other agenda 
items, noting (i) CMM 2008-01 is not particularly effective in achieving conservation outcomes, 
as illustrated in WCPFC7-2010-15; (ii) alternatives need to be developed that do not include 
exemptions; (iii) there is insufficient monitoring capacity to cover the entire Convention Area.  
420. FFA and PNA members stated they prefer a FAD closure to a total closure of the purse 
seine fishery, because a total closure: 
i. 
involves substantially greater economic losses to purse seine fleets fishing mainly in FFA 
waters, especially domestic vessels that have no other alternative fishing grounds; 
ii. 
disrupts supplies to local processing facilities, sustaining rather than removing excess 
capacity;  
iii. 
undermines the sovereign rights of coastal states to decide how to secure reductions in 
fishing mortality from fishing in their waters. 
421. FFA members said that a FAD closure is a more targeted species-specific measure for 
bigeye conservation. PNA members indicated they could support a total closure of the high seas 
and a FAD closure in their EEZs, and will reduce effort in 2011. 
422. Japan raised the concern that the proposal constituted an indirect measure. Fishing effort 
may increase in other months, and some fleets may move from west to east and continue fishing 
and catch the same stocks. Japan supported a catch limit for the purse-seine fleet.  
423. WCPFC7 agreed to consider WCPFC7-2010-DP-26 through the CMM 2008-01 
review process (para. 308). 
424. The following list of papers considered at WCPFC 7 was referred to TCC7 and as 
appropriate SC7 for further discussion and development:   
 
 
 
58 
 
Document 
Number 
Title 
WCPFC-
2010-DP-13 
EU letter, explanatory notes and proposed CMM on Port State Measures 
WCPFC-
2010-DP-09 
FFA members proposed CMM to prohibit purse seine fishing associated with 
Whale sharks 
WCPFC-
2010-DP-15 
(Rev 3) 
Proposal for the implementation of an EEZ entry and exit notification scheme 
WCPFC-
2010-DP-17 
(Rev 1) 
Proposed CMM mitigating fishing impacts on cetaceans 
WCPFC-
2010-DP-11 
Proposal by Tonga to amend paragraph 15 of CMM 2007-03 including the 
decision reflected in para 265. 
WCPFC-
2010-13 
Current CMMs with implementation issues 
WCPFC-
2010-30 
Current CMMs requiring further discussion 
WCPFC 
2010-DP-22 
(Rev 1) 
WCPFC Catch Documentation Scheme including FFA proposed guiding 
principles and terms of reference. 
WCPFC 
2010-DP-29 
EU proposal on operation of Commission VMS, including Audit, TOR and Cost 
Savings 
WCPFC 
2010-DP-19 
EU, Japan, Korea and Chinese Taipei proposal on ensuring the opportunity for 
vessel captain / operators to review and comment on the Commissions ROP 
report. 
 
425. The following list of measures is referred to TCC7 for inclusion in the discussion on an 
enhanced CMM 2008-01 (WCPFC 2010-DP-32 (Rev 3)):   
Document 
Number 
Title 
WCPFC 
2010-DP-01 
Philippines discussion paper for the annual review of CMM 2008-01  
WCPFC 
2010-DP-02 
Japan proposal on large scale purse seine fishing capacity and effort 
WCPFC-
2010-DP-06 
PNA proposal on closure of additional high seas to purse seine fishing 
WCPFC 
2010-DP-03 
Japan analysis of purse seine increase  
WCPFC 
2010-DP-20 
Korean proposed CMM to prohibit night setting during FAD closure  
59 
 
(Rev 1) 
WCPFC 
2010-DP-24 
Philippines proposed amendment to CMM 2008-01  
WCPFC 
2010-DP-26 
EU proposal for CMM of tropical tunas (bigeye, yellowfin and skipjack) in the 
convention area. 
 
AGENDA  ITEM  10  -  REPORT OF THE FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION 
COMMITTEE 
10.1 
Review of the Committee Meeting 
426. The Chair of the Finance and Administration Committee (FAC), Ambassador Terry 
Toomata (Samoa) presented the report of FAC4 (WCPFC6-2010-32, (Rev 1)) (Attachment CC).  
Highlights of the report included ongoing arrears (the Chair noted recent contributions and 
thanked members, and SIDS in particular, for their contributions); the draft strategic plan; staff 
salary increases, linked to CROP staff salary scales; addition of an assistant science manager 
position; and the proposed budget and work programme for 2011. The FAC Chair noted certain 
reductions in the proposed 2011 budget, as put forward by the FAC, and the need to agree on a 
formula for CNMs; the FAC recommended that all CNMs be asked to contribute 50% of the 
amount that would be due if that CNM was a member.  
427. A CCM noted that there are outstanding unpaid dues, and encouraged members to address 
their arrears.   
428. Canada introduced the draft strategic plan (WCPFC7-2010-FAC4/15 (Rev 15)), noting that 
a template was under development that could be used by members when nominating CMMs so 
that their strategic impacts can be better evaluated; FAC-4 recommended adoption of the plan. 
429. CCMs discussed the calculation of contributions by members. The Finance and 
Administration Officer clarified that the catch figures in calculating member contributions are 
based on an average of the most current 3-year catch figures as compiled by SPC. The catch 
tables are included in the budget tables, and circulated to members 45 days prior to the meeting to 
allow for review.  
430. CCMs noted the significant budget increases in the 2012 indicative budget, and the need to 
contain costs and address cost recovery. Some CCMs noted the high per capita contributions they 
make to the Commission. Concerns were raised over the increase in the wealth component 
contribution, and some CCMs suggested the Commission should consider capping this.  
431. CCMs agreed on the importance of conducting a yellowfin stock assessment in 2011, to 
inform the Commission’s review of CMM 2008-01, and decided to retain US$70,000 in the 2011 
budget for that assessment, with the understanding the funds would be carried over to 2012 
should SPC find it was not feasible to conduct the assessment in 2011 as scheduled.  
10.2 
Budget Approval for 2011 
432. WCPFC7 accepted the recommendations of FAC4 as set out in the report of FAC4 
(WCPFC6-2010/32, Rev 1), specifically noting that it: 
i. 
accepted the audited financial statements for 2009 as set out in paper WCPFC7-2010-
FAC4/04, and encouraged all members to pay their contributions on time and in full; 
ii. 
adopted salary increases from 1 January 2011 as follows: 3% for Grade I; 4% for Grade 
J; 10% for Grade K; and 15% for Grades L and M; and noted, in respect of support staff, 
60 
 
the statutory increase of 1% in employer social security contributions introduced by the 
Government of the Federated States of Micronesia and accordingly increased its 
employer contribution figure by 1%, which will be reflected in its Staff Regulations; 
established a new Grade J position with the terms of reference at Attachment 3 to FAC-
4;  
iii. 
adopted the Commission Budget and Work Programme as contained in the FAC4 report; 
iv. 
agreed that all CNMs should pay an annual contribution that is 50% of the assessed 
contribution amount that would be payable if the CNM was a member, and that the 
Executive Director will inform CNMs and Members of the level of their recommended 
and assessed contributions as soon as practicable after each Annual Session and the 
amounts should be payable within 60 days of receipt of that notification. Contributions 
received from CNMs will be used to reduce the assessed contributions of Members in the 
year following receipt. 
v. 
adopted the strategic plan as a living document that will incorporate the ongoing work of 
the Commission subsidiary bodies and Annual Sessions; and  
vi. 
endorsed the report of FAC-4. 
433. The Commission thanked Ambassador Toomata for his work in co-chairing the FAC, and 
expressed its appreciation to Ken Smithson, WCPFC Finance and Administration Officer, for his 
support to the Secretariat and the FAC. 
AGENDA  ITEM  11  -  PERFORMANCE REVIEW  
434. The Secretariat presented WCPFC7-2010-34, explaining that the RFMO Performance 
Review for the Commission was deferred in 2010 due to lack of funding.  TCC6 recommended 
that after five years it was time to conduct such a performance review. The previous terms of 
reference for the Commission Performance Review (noted in WCPFC6-2009-IP-07) are attached 
to WCPFC7-2010-34. Funding for the review was included in the draft budget for consideration 
by the Commission at WCPFC7. 
435. In the ensuing discussion, CCMs supported the need for a review, and agreed that (i) the 
review should include both independent experts (support was variously raised for inclusion of 
legal, general fisheries, scientific and civil society experts) and members of the Commission, 
including SIDS representation; and (ii) should be undertaken in 2011.  
436. WCPFC7 agreed that a performance review of the Commission would be undertaken 
in 2011, and tasked the Executive Director with (i) developing criteria for the review based 
on input received from members, and reflective of characteristics of WCPFC; and (ii) 
proposing a review panel to members for their approval that reflects the input received.  
AGENDA  ITEM  12  -  ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS 
12.1 
Election of Officers 
437. WCPFC7 approved the nominations by FAC4, SC6, TCC6, and the NC for the 
following officers:  (i) Mr Charleston Deiye (Nauru) for a two year term (2011 and 2012) 
and Mr Liu Xiaobing (China) for a further two year term (2011 and 2012) as co-chairs of 
the FAC; (ii) Dr. Naozumi Miyabe (Japan) to continue his service as Chair of the SC for a 
further period of 2 years; (iii) Ms. Holly Koehler (USA) to serve as vice-chair of the TCC 
for an initial period of 2 years; and Mr. Masanori Miyahara (Japan) to continue his service 
as Chair of the NC. 
438. WCPFC7 approved the nominations of Dr Charles Karnella (USA) to serve as Chair 
of the Commission, and of Mr. Matthew Hooper (New Zealand) to serve as vice chair.   
61 
 
12.2 
Next Meeting 
439. Palau confirmed its interest in holding WCPFC8 in Koror, Palau.  
440. FSM offered to host the seventh meeting of the TCC, and, subject to confirmation, the 
seventh meeting of the SC. Korea offered to host SC7 should FSM not be able to do so. 
441. Provisional dates for the 2011 meetings of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies are as 
follows:  
i. 
SC7: Pohnpei, FSM (to be confirmed) (9–17 August 2011)  
ii. 
NC7: (to be confirmed), Japan (6-9 September 2011)  
iii. 
TCC7: Pohnpei, FSM (28 September–4 October 2011)  
iv. 
FAC5: Koror, Palau (4 December 2011)  
v. 
WCPFC8: Koror, Palau, (5–9 December 2011)  
AGENDA  ITEM  13  -  OTHER MATTERS 
442. No other matters were raised. 
AGENDA  ITEM  14  -  SUMMAY REPORT 
443. A summary report was prepared by the rapporteur and the Secretariat and circulated to 
CCMs for comment.   
AGENDA  ITEM  15  -  CLOSE OF MEETING 
444. A statement by Greenpeace noted its disappointment with the efforts of some CCMs to 
block conservation measures, and congratulated PNA and FFA members on their conservation 
efforts.  
445. Korea thanked members for adopting a number of proposals, and looked forward to 
discussion of the proposal in WCPFC7-2010-DP-20 at TCC7 or WCPFC8. 
446. Japan spoke on behalf of Asian CCMs, and expressed gratitude to the Secretariat for their 
hard work; warm appreciation to the USA, Hawaii and the WPRFMC for hosting the meeting; 
and thanks to the Chair for his contributions over the previous two years. 
447. Several CCMs expressed appreciation to the USA for hosting the meeting in Honolulu, to 
WPRFMC for their support, and to the Secretariat for their hard work in preparing the meeting 
documents. They congratulated the newly elected chair, noting his knowledge and experience 
would be important in leading the Commission in the future, and extended gratitude to 
Commission’s retiring Chair. They also acknowledged the work of Ms. Sylvie Lapointe (Canada), 
outgoing vice chair of the Commission, and thanked Canada for making her available to support 
the Commission.  
448. FFA and PNA members expressed their disappointment with the progress achieved at the 
meeting, and concern that some members were being threatened in response to possible license 
closures. They looked forward to future development of conservation measures by the 
Commission compatible with measures adopted by the PNA and FFA. 
449. FSM supported the comments made by the FFA and PNA, and gave particular 
acknowledgement to the USA Hawaii and WPRFMC for hosting the meeting on short notice. 
They also thanked members for their contributions to the Bernard Thoulag scholarship fund.     
450. Dr Charles Karnella, on behalf of the USA, thanked WPRFMC and members of his 
delegation for their work in handling the meeting arrangements, the Secretariat for its support, 
62 
 
and the Chair for his leadership and guidance for last 2 years. He thanked his fellow Commission 
members for giving him the honor of chairing the Commission for the next two years.  
451. The Chair Ambassador Nandan thanked members for their support, and the USA and 
Hawaii for hosting the meeting. He noted that by far the greatest challenge for the Commission 
now and in the future is taking effective measures to ensure the conservation of highly migratory 
fish stocks in the Convention Area, in association with consideration of the impact on developing 
CCMs. He remarked on the cooperative spirit that prevails in the Commission, while noting the 
failure to pass measures on capacity limits, and to reduce the mortality of bigeye and yellowfin. 
He indicated he was confident the Commission had agreed to an effective strategy for amendment 
of CMM 2008-01. He thanked the current and previous Executive Directors and Secretariat staff 
for their help, and acknowledged the work of the Commission Vice Chair. He offered advice to 
guide future deliberations, noting the need to develop priorities, spend less time on procedural 
matters, and consider innovative approaches to streamline the work of the Commission. He 
suggested giving more responsibility to TCC, and avoiding repeating work and discussions 
undertaken in Committees during the Commission sessions. He also noted the expanding 
Commission membership, and the increased number of attendees, with attendant impacts on the 
meeting organization, cost and venue. He stated that he was leaving the Commission with a sense 
of pride and gratitude, and the hope that members would keep alive the fundamental objective of 
the Convention, as expressed in Article 2, so that future generations will continue to enjoy the 
benefits of the region’s fisheries resources. He closed by warmly congratulating the new 
Commission Chair.  
452. The Chair closed WCPFC7 at 19:35 on 10 December 2010. 
