The Commission for the Conservation and Management of 
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean 
 
 
Nineteenth Regular Session of the Commission 
28 November to 3 December 2022 
 
  
  
SUMMARY REPORT  
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 1  — OPENING OF MEETING  
1. 
The Nineteenth Regular Session of the Commission for the Conservation and Management of 
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPFC19) took place from 28 
November to 3 December 2022 at the Royal Lotus Hotel in Da Nang, Vietnam.  
2. 
The following Members and Participating Territories (CCMs) attended WCPFC19: American 
Samoa, Australia, Canada, the People’s Republic of China, the Cook Islands, the European Union (EU), the 
Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), Fiji, France, French Polynesia, Guam, Indonesia, Japan, Kiribati, the 
Republic of Korea, the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI), Nauru, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Niue, 
Palau, Papua New Guinea (PNG), the Philippines, Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Chinese Taipei, Tokelau, 
Tonga, Tuvalu, the United States of America (USA) and Vanuatu.    
3. 
The following non-party countries attended WCPFC19 as Cooperating Non-Members (CNMs): 
Curacao, Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Nicaragua, Panama, Thailand and Vietnam.  
4. 
Observers from the following intergovernmental organizations attended WCPFC19: African, 
Caribbean and Pacific Group of States (ACP), Agreement on the Conservation of Albatross and Petrels 
(ACAP), Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC), International Scientific Committee for Tuna 
and Tuna-like Species in the North Pacific Ocean (ISC), North Pacific Fisheries Commission (NPFC), 
Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA), the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS), The Pacific 
Community (SPC), Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA), Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment 
Programme (SPREP), and The World Bank.  
5. 
Observers from the following non-governmental organizations (NGOs) attended WCPFC19: 
Advocates for Public Interest Law (APIL), Australian National Centre for Ocean Resources and Security 
(ANCORS), Birdlife International, Conservation International (CI), Global Fishing Watch (GFW, 
International MCS Network, International Pole and Line Foundation (IPNLF), International Seafood 
Sustainability Foundation (ISSF), Marine Stewardship Council (MSC), Organisation for the Promotion of 
2  
  
Responsible Tuna Fisheries (OPRT), Organization for Regional and Inter-regional Studies (ORIS), Pew 
Charitable Trust, Seafood Legacy, The Global Tuna Alliance, The Nature Conservancy (TNC), The Ocean 
Foundation, World Tuna Purse Seine Organisation (WTPO),  World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF). 
6. 
A full list of all participants is provided in Attachment A. 
7. 
Dr. Lara Manarangi-Trott, WCPFC Compliance Manager, welcomed delegates to the opening 
session and introduced the speakers. 
8. 
Dr. Tran Dinh Luan, Director General of the Directorate of Fisheries of the Government of Vietnam 
provided the Keynote Address. On behalf of the leaders of the Directorate of Fisheries, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Development of Vietnam, he warmly welcomed delegates attending WCPFC19. He 
observed that Vietnam is located in a part of the Pacific region with rich and diverse biological resources. 
Vietnam's fisheries industry, which is developed with a focus on small-scale, multi-specialty and multi-
species fisheries is gradually transforming, with increased aquaculture production and reduced catches. 
Total fisheries production in November 2022 was estimated at 8.2 million tons, with a catch volume of about 
3.5 million tons and aquaculture production of 4.6 million tons. In the first 10 months of 2022, fisheries 
export turnover reached $9.4 billion USD. He stated that Vietnam's capture fisheries have developed rapidly 
but faced many difficulties and challenges. He noted that Vietnam’s goals include maintaining the 
sustainable development of the fishery industry, with fishing vessels and gear appropriate to the allowable 
level of exploitation of aquatic resources; ensuring that safe production and high economic efficiency 
contribute to improving the lives of fishermen; and ensuring national defence and security and maintaining 
the country's independence and sovereignty over seas and islands. He stated the Government of Vietnam 
issued many domestic guidelines and policies to realize these goals and has ratified and participated in 
various international agreements, for example:  the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 
(UNCLOS), the United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement (UNFSA), and the United Nations Food and 
Agriculture Organization (FAO) Port State Measures Agreement. He noted that Vietnam has been a WCPFC 
CNM from 2009 to the present, and as such has been working with the WCPFC’s 26 CCMs, 8 CNMs and 
7 participating territories to implement WCPFC CMMs relating to migratory fisheries resources in the 
WCPO. He stated that the WCPFC's projects have created favourable conditions for Vietnam to receive 
fisheries-related technical support and advanced technology. He stated Vietnam greatly appreciated the 
opportunity to host WCPFC19, which enabled Vietnam's fishing industry in general and tuna fishing in 
particular to integrate deeply with the world's fisheries, thereby contributing to strengthening cooperation 
with other CCMs and CNMs, regional fisheries organizations, and multilateral organizations. The Director 
General stated that Vietnam would continue to actively participate and seek to contribute even more 
effectively in the WCPFC, and reiterated Vietnam’s interest in becoming a full member of WCPFC. He 
stated Vietnam supported the region's joint commitment and efforts to strengthen the traceability of tuna 
products; conserve and sustainably develop migratory resources; and combat illegal, unreported and 
unreported fishing, in compliance with regional and international regulations towards responsible fisheries. 
The Director General wished all delegates productive discussions in Da Nang city and an enjoyable stay in 
Vietnam. His remarks are included as Attachment B. 
9. 
The Commission Chair, Ms Jung-re Riley Kim welcomed Dr. Tran Dinh Luan, the Director General 
of the Directorate of Fisheries of Vietnam, as well as the honourable ministers, delegates, representatives 
and attendees at WCPFC19. She expressed her appreciation to the government of Vietnam for hosting 
WCPFC19 in Da Nang, and for its warm hospitality. She stated that as Dr. Luan alluded, Vietnam and the 
WCPFC have maintained longstanding cooperation. She stated that two rounds of tuna data management 
workshops took place in Vietnam in 2022 with the assistance of SPC-OFP, the Commission’s scientific 
services provider, and stated she looked forward to even closer cooperation between the WCPFC and 
Vietnam. She observed that the Commission’s last in-person meeting (WCPFC16) was held in Papua New 
Guinea, and at that meeting it was not imagined that it would be the last such in-person meeting for several 
3  
  
years. She noted that the work of the Commission had not been spared from the impact of the pandemic; 
mandates and responsibilities could not be delayed, which resulted in the need to work even harder and 
engage even more closely, albeit virtually in the face of the unprecedented global health crisis. She stated 
that the Commission successfully carried out important tasks, and made significant progress, and that 
through this perseverance, the Commission again demonstrated its collective strength as the custodian of 
the world’s largest tuna fishery. She observed that the Commission had a very full agenda to address at 
WCPFC19, including a number of scientific presentations under Agenda Item 6, reflecting the importance 
of scientific information in support of the Commission’s decision-making. She emphasized the importance 
for WCPFC19 of the adoption of a Management Procedure (MP) for skipjack tuna, and progressing various 
elements of Harvest Strategies for the key tuna stocks. She also noted the need to move beyond the 
Commission’s use of a “bridging measure” to manage skipjack, yellowfin and bigeye tuna stocks through 
implementation of the Harvest Strategy Work Plan (HSWP), while acknowledging that the Commission 
faced some very important decisions in 2023 to either revise or develop a new tropical tuna measure (TTM) 
that outlines hard limits for purse seine effort or catch, and longline limits and their allocation. She stated 
that at WCPFC19 CCMs would have an opportunity to discuss next steps so that the Commission can fulfil 
its commitment envisaged in CMM 2021-01. She noted the need to address issues related to the Compliance 
Monitoring Scheme (CMS) on the risk-based assessment framework (RBAF) and compliance audit points, 
as well as to review the work of various intersessional working groups (IWGs). She stated that the WCPFC 
boasts one of the most advanced CMSs among regional fisheries management organisations (RFMOs), and 
hoped that WCPFC19 could make further progress to make the system even stronger. She also highlighted 
the importance of resuming the Compliance Monitoring Report (CMR) review in 2023 so as not to leave 
any unmanageable gap in compliance monitoring. She also noted the opportunity to make progress in 
transhipment management discussions. She stated that the Commission would also consider improvement 
of ecosystem management, including as it relates to sharks and seabirds. She also highlighted the importance 
of work on labour standards, noting that the lines between the mandates of RFMOs and other organizations 
are blurring, and it was no longer possible to say it is not the WCPFC’s responsibility to deal with issues 
that are not directly related to fishery resource management, because fisheries impacts are inextricably 
linked with issues involving people and environments. She stressed the need to push boundaries to address 
overarching issues, including labour standards and climate change, noting the latter was likely to impact 
small island developing states (SIDS) the hardest if left unmanaged. She stated that the time was mature for 
incorporating climate change considerations into the work of the Commission. She expressed the hope the 
WCPFC19 outcomes document would contain a number of agreements and achievements that all delegates 
could be proud of. She closed by voicing her appreciation for the excellent and professional assistance 
provided by the Secretariat and SPC-OFP, as well as the contributions of the ISC, and the Chairs, Vice 
Chairs, Convenors and Co-Convenors of the subsidiary bodies and working groups. Her remarks are 
included as Attachment C.   
10. 
The WCPFC Executive Director, Feleti P Teo, OBE welcomed the Director-General of the 
Directorate of Fisheries of Vietnam and thanked him for sharing Vietnam’s insights on the work of the 
Commission and for affirming Vietnam’s commitment to remain engaged and active in the work of the 
Commission. He also acknowledged and welcomed the other dignitaries and delegates attending WCPFC19. 
He noted that WCPFC19 was unique in that it was the first hybrid meeting of the Commission to include 
virtual and face-to-face participation, and its first physical meeting since the onset of the COVID-19 
pandemic; and he also remarked on the pleasure of reconnecting in person with delegates and colleagues. 
He congratulated and commended the Government of Vietnam for successfully hosting the 19th annual 
meeting of the Commission despite the challenges arising from the COVID-19 pandemic, and for becoming 
the first CNM state to host a Commission meeting, let alone an annual meeting. He observed that this 
constituted a significant affirmation of Vietnam’s commitment to sustainable conservation and management 
principles upon which the WCPFC is founded. He recalled the challenges faced by the Commission in 
adapting and adjusting to a new working environment as dictated by the disruptive impacts of the COVID-
19 pandemic on international travel and modes of transacting businesses, and expressed his admiration at 
4  
  
the high level of resilience, adaptability and perseverance of the Commission’s members, noting that despite 
the inability to meet physically and the constraints and confinements of virtual meetings, the Commission 
sustained its routine operations and functions as mandated by the WCPF Convention.  Although, there were 
slippages in achievement of agreed timelines for some of the more technically challenging issues like those 
associated with implementation of the HSWP, the Commission continued to undertake its scheduled stock 
assessments; sustained and continued operations of its compliance and monitoring control and surveillance 
tools and programmes; sustained and improved the operations of the WCPFC Compliance Monitoring 
Scheme (CMS); negotiated a revised Tropical Tuna Measure (TTM); and convened on a trial basis the first 
virtual Science-Management Dialogue (SMD). He stated that attaining these achievements despite the 
challenging operational circumstances attested to the unique character of the WCPFC which is the 
Commission’s ability to rise to the occasion and do right for the sustainability of the health of the fish stocks 
under the purview of the Commission. He stated he was looking forward to that unique character to guide 
the Commission in Da Nang as it addressed key issues of harvest strategy development and implementation 
including a Management Procedure for skipjack; ongoing reforms to improve the efficiency and efficacy of 
the CMS; preparations for negotiations of a new or revised TTM in 2023; and progressing the important 
work of the various IWGs on issues such as electronic reporting and monitoring (ER and EM), crew labour 
standards, and the transhipment review. The Executive Director stated that his Annual Report for 2022 
documents a full and active year for the Commission and the Secretariat, which included virtual meetings 
of all its subsidiary bodies, a number of intersessional working groups, a special session to consider the 
intersessional decisions to suspend certain observer placement requirements, and the first SMD. He 
observed that the outcomes of all these meetings would be considered by the Commission in Da Nang, and 
would form the basis for the WCPFC19 decisions. The Executive Director stated that as he anticipated his 
departure from WCPFC in early 2023 he did so with fond memories and a sense of self-satisfaction. He 
noted that in Apia, Samoa at WCPFC11 in December 2014 he was entrusted with the responsibility of 
leading the WCPFC Secretariat, which he stated he undertook with all seriousness, dignity and humility. He 
stated his gratitude of having been a very small part of the WCPFC’s journey over the past eight years, and 
noted the WCPFC’s many successes and achievements, unmatched by its counterpart tuna-RFMOs. He 
noted with thanks and appreciation the contributions of those who had collaborated closely with the 
Secretariat in the planning and preparations of the material and documentation for WCPFC19, including the 
staff of SPC-OFP; the CCMs, CNMs, and observers who contributed papers for the meeting; his tireless 
colleagues at the WCPFC Secretariat, including the Legal Adviser Dr Penny Riding; and the Commission 
Chair, Ms Jung-re Riley Kim, noting it had been a joy and pleasure to be led and guided by her. He closed 
by wishing the Commission very well in its deliberations and stated that the Secretariat stood ready to 
support the Commission’s deliberations. The Executive Director’s opening statement is included as 
Attachment D. 
1.1 
Adoption of Agenda  
11. 
The Provisional Agenda was initially issued on 5 October 2022. A revised agenda in WCPFC19-
2022-01 rev1 was issued on 29 October 2022. 
12. 
The Agenda was adopted (Attachment E). 
13. 
A delegate from Niue offered the opening prayer. 
1.2 
Statements from Members and Participating Territories  
14. 
American Samoa greeted the Chair, delegates and members. It stated that the previous day many of 
the parties at WCPFC19 had signed a Memorandum of Understanding (the South Pacific Tuna Treaty) with 
the USA regarding fishing access terms for 2023, and congratulated all parties for this accomplishment; it 
5  
  
noted that the treaty, an ongoing agreement between the USA and 16 Pacific Island countries is just as 
important to American Samoa as it is to other parties. The treaty allows U.S. flagged purse seine vessels to 
fish in the exclusive economic zones (EEZs) of the Pacific Island countries that are parties to the treaty.  All 
U.S. flagged tuna purse seiners that are based in Pago Pago and that supply tuna to canneries in American 
Samoa depend on the treaty for access to the fishing grounds managed by the Commission. American Samoa 
stated that the treaty first entered into force in 1988 when the fishery was very different; at that time the U.S. 
flagged purse seine fleet was the second-largest operating in what is now the WCPFC Convention Area. 
The fleet operated predominantly in and out of American Samoa feeding the raw material needs of American 
Samoa’s canneries. For some time, the U.S. flagged purse seine fleet grew in numbers as some operators 
choose the U.S. flag to take advantage of the favourable terms of access afforded to them by the Tuna Treaty. 
Over time, that changed and in recent years the number of U.S. flagged purse seiners serving the needs of 
American Samoa’s tuna dependent economy continues to decline, and has reached a critically low level. 
Boats have left the U.S. flag to take advantage of better terms of access, such as the exemptions from the 
FAD closure and limits on the high seas for vessels that are either flagged or chartered to SIDS. American 
Samoa stated that these same considerations are not afforded to the American Samoa-based fleet on which 
American Samoa’s economy urgently depends, even though the Convention itself makes clear that 
Participating Territories are to be considered in the same light as other SIDS. It stated that if the Commission 
continues to fail to address this, the trend will continue, and American Samoa will lose its tuna supply. 
American Samoa stated that it is a small island developing territory and highly dependent on its tuna fishery, 
which is managed by the Commission, noting that Article 30 of the Convention clearly states that “… the 
Commission shall take into account the special requirements of developing States Parties, in particular small 
island developing States, and of territories and possessions.” American Samoa asked CCMs to recognize 
that this is the most critical issue for its economic survival and stated the hope that CCMs would follow the 
guidelines provided in the Convention.    
15. 
Australia thanked Vietnam for its hospitality and expressed gratitude to all members for their efforts 
to progress issues during the Covid-19 pandemic. Australia also thanked the Secretariat for its thorough 
preparations for the meeting, and stated it is pleased that all four major commercial tuna stocks remain above 
sustainable limits, and the Commission should seek to continue to manage the region’s shared fish stocks in 
line with best practice to ensure they remain sustainable well into the future. Australia stated it remains 
strongly committed to the ongoing development and implementation of harvest strategies by WCPFC, 
noting that their adoption is essential to achieve long-term security of migratory tuna stocks. To this end, 
Australia strongly encouraged CCMs to support the FFA’s proposal on a management procedure for 
skipjack tuna, noting that this is a very important step forward for the Commission. Australia stated it was 
very pleased to bring forward on behalf of FFA members a proposal for a new CMM for Southwest Pacific 
swordfish. Australia has noted its concerns regarding management of this important stock to WCPFC, and 
stated that the proposed measure would constitute an important step in ensuring the long-term sustainability 
of the stock, while protecting future opportunities for fisheries development for SIDS. Australia welcomed 
the progress made in 2022 to improve the CMS, and observed the critical importance of ensuring the 
Commission has an effective, robust and fair compliance scheme. Australia also looked forward to working 
with CCMs on the CMS at WCPC19 and in the months leading up to TCC19. Australia expressed its sincere 
thanks to the Commission Chair for her leadership, counsel and kindness over the past four years, and to the 
outgoing Executive Director for his professionalism and leadership. Australia closed by stating it was 
committed to making significant progress at WCFC19 and looked forward to a successful meeting.  
16. 
China stated that it was sorry it could not send a delegation in person, due to China’s COVID-19 
prevention policy, but was very happy to see everyone online. China stated that its participation, cooperation 
and collaboration would not be limited by the need to participate virtually, and stated his hope that it would 
be possible to produce fruitful results for sustainable management.  
6  
  
17. 
The Honourable Heremoana Maamaatuaiahutapu, Minister of Culture, Environment and Marine 
Resources of French Polynesia submitted his opening statement, in which he thanked the Executive Director, 
the Chair, and Secretariat staff, for their efforts, and thanked Vietnam for hosting WCPFC19. He observed 
that French Polynesia promotes an alternative to the development model based on economic growth alone, 
noting its objectives include improving quality of life, re-appropriating traditional concepts and knowhow, 
and creating solidarity among generations and peoples. He stated that the oceans can help address the crucial 
challenges humanity faces, noting that EEZs are food reservoirs, via fishing and aquaculture, but are also 
full of promise for health and medical research. He stated that French Polynesia had not issued fishing 
licenses to foreign vessels since 1996, and the fishing sector is exclusively Polynesian. French Polynesia 
obtained certification issued by the Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) for its albacore and yellowfin tuna 
fisheries in 2018, and for swordfish in 2021. The MSC certification guarantees that fishery products come 
from sustainable and well-managed supply chains. The Minister stated it is important that certain CMMs 
can be strengthened and harmonized with IATTC, and that work on management strategies be completed, 
and on time. In 2019 French Polynesia accounted for just 0.24% of the Pacific-wide catch of the four main 
tuna species (skipjack, yellowfin, bigeye, southern albacore), equal to 7,189 metric tons out of a total of 
2,997,309 metric tons. He stated that French Polynesia has 212 marine species and 51 marine areas protected 
by the Polynesian environmental code; 40 regulated fishing areas and 30 “educational marine areas”. In 
2002, French Polynesia became the largest marine mammal sanctuary in the world, which now also protects 
all shark species, sea turtle species and all mobula rays species. In 2018, French Polynesia created Tainui 
atea, an ocean space of 5 million km² protected by its environmental code. Tainui ātea is the heir to more 
than 70 years of protective measures put in place by successive Polynesian governments and which protects 
all Polynesian birds, organized traditional and professional fishing, and prohibits access to certain areas of 
the territory to preserve nature. He emphasised the importance of addressing the massive arrival of drifting 
FADs in many EEZs, stating that the drifting FADs found along the coasts of French Polynesia’s islands 
and atolls are deployed in large part by purse seine fisheries in the Eastern Pacific, and they constitute a 
source of pollution that should be denounced and stopped. He stated that it is important for French 
Polynesia’s islands, already subject to the effects of climate change, that efforts are continued, awareness 
raised, and that leaders understand the urgent need to limit the use of FADs and the resulting impact on the 
reefs, ecosystems, and fisheries. He stated that it is necessary that purse seiners become responsible for the 
damage they cause. He stated that Government of French Polynesia seeks to prevent FADs from drifting 
into its EEZ, and to prevent them from stranding on French Polynesia’s shores. He asked CCMs consider 
the importance of harmonizing management measures between the EPO and WCPO, which he stated was 
important to in order to guarantee the application and effectiveness of CMMs. 
18. 
Indonesia thanked the Chair, the Secretariat, and the Government of Vietnam for their excellent 
work in facilitating WCPFC19, and expressed condolences and solidarity for those facing hardship and loss 
related to COVID-19. It stated that to comply with the TTMs applied in the WCPFC Convention Area, 
Indonesia developed an Interim Harvest Strategy Framework for tropical tuna in Indonesian Archipelagic 
Waters beginning in 2014. The interim framework was launched in 2018 with yearly updates provided to 
WCPFC meetings to inform the Commission and its subsidiary bodies regarding the harvest strategy 
progress. Indonesia stated that it is a challenging process, and Indonesia received much input and support 
from fishery stakeholders and experts in progressing the development and implementation of the framework. 
Indonesia noted that it is willing to collaborate with neighbouring countries to ensure the region’s 
sustainability of tropical tuna stocks. It noted that in CMM 2014-06 the Commission agreed to develop and 
implement a harvest strategy approach for each of the key fisheries or stocks under its purview. The 
Commission also agreed on a work plan and indicative timeframes to adopt or refine harvest strategies for 
skipjack, bigeye, yellowfin, South Pacific albacore, pacific bluefin, and northern albacore tuna. However, 
some of the expected progress has yet to be achieved following the proposed timelines. Therefore, Indonesia 
proposed to revisit the timelines adopted in the CMM 2014-06 and encouraged other CCMs to expedite the 
development of harvest strategy in the WCPO, and maintain their awareness of the status of tuna stocks in 
their subregion. Indonesia also stated it sought to review progress on the intersessional discussion on the 
7  
  
proposed CMM on Labour Standards, Safety and Security for Crew on Fishing Vessels; it noted discussions 
had been held over the prior two years, virtually co-chaired by Indonesia and New Zealand. Although 
discussions remain in progress, Indonesia stressed the importance of finalizing and adopting the proposal to 
avoid and mitigate the risks of further abuse of crew members being perpetrated by captains and vessel 
owners that fly their flag in the Commission and operate in the WCPFC Convention Area. Indonesia also 
sought to inform delegates on progress relating to Indonesia’s handline fishery, which has two main 
components, one that targets large yellowfin tuna and the other that generally catches small tuna (yellowfin, 
bigeye, and skipjack tuna). Indonesia’s small-scale hook-and-line fisheries are restricted to territorial seas 
and archipelagic waters. However, a certain component of the catch of the Indonesia “large-fish” handline 
fishery taken from Indonesia’s EEZ may be relevant to the TTMs. An information document (WCPFC19-
2022-DP11) relevant to the Handline Fishery was provided collaboratively by Indonesia and SPC. Indonesia 
also drew attention to the provision enshrined in Article 4 of the Convention on the Conservation and 
Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the WCPO, which states that nothing in the Convention 
shall prejudice the rights, jurisdiction, and duties of States under UNCLOS and the UNFSA, and that 
elaborates that the Convention shall be interpreted and applied in the context of and in a manner consistent 
with the UNCLOS and the UNFSA. It closed expressing the hope that the critical issues to be deliberated at 
WCPFC19 would provide beneficial results that contribute significantly to meeting the WCPFC’s 
objectives, and stated Indonesia would work constructively and cooperatively with other CCMs to that end.  
19. 
Kiribati read out a statement on behalf of the Kiribati Minister for Fisheries and Marine Resources 
Development, and Chair of the Forum Fisheries Agency Forum Fisheries Committee (FFC) the Honourable 
Ribanataake Tiwau who was unable to attend the meeting. The statement expressed the pleasure to meet 
everyone again in person, and sincere gratitude to the host, the Government and people of Vietnam, for the 
warm hospitality extended to the Commission.  On behalf of FFA members, he thanked the Chair, and all 
CCMs, for their virtual work together over the prior 3 years, stating that despite the challenges, the 
Commission had managed to continue to transact significant work, including working towards the revised 
CMM for Tropical Tuna and the CMS. He stated that this was a testament to members’ shared commitment 
to ensuring the long-term sustainability of our tuna resources. He stated that FFA members had continuously 
highlighted how significant these resources are to the Pacific people, and that the importance had only 
increased with the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on Pacific economies, as the Pacific’s tuna resources 
underpin both economic recovery and food security. At the same time, the impacts of climate change are 
being directly felt and cannot be considered a “future threat”.  He stated that it is in this context that FFA 
members continue to pursue their development aspirations and reiterate their special requirements in 
accordance with Article 30 of the Convention, CMM 2013-07, and CMM 2013-06. He stated that FFA 
members submitted a number of priorities for the meeting as outlined in WCPFC19-2022-DP03, including 
the CMM proposals for an MP for skipjack tuna in WCPFC19-2022-DP04, electronic reporting in 
WCPFC19-2022-DP05, Harvest Strategies in WCPFC19-2022-DP06 and swordfish in WCPFC19-2022-
DP07. He stated that FFA members sought the same spirit of cooperation that has seen the Commission 
through its challenges for the work at WCPFC19. He recognised the hard work and leadership of the 
WCPFC Chair for ably steering the Commission through its virtual meetings, and expressed his appreciation 
to the Executive Director and his team for the excellent preparation for this meeting.  He closed by stating 
he was very much looked forward to the upcoming discussions.  
20. 
The Honourable John M. Silk, Minister of the Republic of the Marshall Islands Ministry of Natural 
Resources and Commerce (NRC), and Chairman of the Marshall Islands Marine Resources Authority 
(MIMRA) Board of Directors acknowledged the Honourable Ministers and other distinguished 
representatives, delegates, and attendees at WCPFC, and stated it was a pleasure to meet in person. He also 
conveyed his delegation's gratitude to the Government and People of Vietnam. He acknowledged the very 
good work and guidance of the WCPFC Chair, noting that her leadership and management of the issues and 
the wide-ranging views and positions of CCMs, CNMs and observers had been very fair, firm and 
productive, and also thanked the Government of Korea. The Minister also thanked the WCPFC Executive 
8  
  
Director for his many years of able stewardship and sound leadership of the WCPFC Secretariat. He drew 
attention to the key priority issues for RMI: the proposals in WCPFC19-2022-DP04 (CMM on an MP for 
WCPO skipjack tuna) and WCPFC19-2022-DP06 (proposed amendment to CMM 2014-06 on establishing 
a Harvest Strategy for key fisheries and stocks in the WCPO), which were tabled by FFA members. He 
emphasized the importance of the proposals for all CCMs and CNMs, and stated his confidence that the 
outcome would reflect everyone’s collective and effective participation, noting that the alternative was grim, 
and did not bode well for future management and development goals.  He suggested that the fundamental 
questions to ask are namely: where do we see our fishery in 5 or 10 years?;  what must we do now to ensure 
the many interconnected issues that we see as crucial towards ensuring our livelihoods and resilience and 
those of generations to come are secured well into the future?; and how can we be efficient in moving these 
many interconnected issues into decisions that can be acceptable to all? He stated that he posed these 
questions in the hope that when participants leave Vietnam, they will have taken a collective decision that 
ensures stocks are well managed and managed for the sake of the future. He noted that other important items 
on the agenda such as the labour standards and the CMS measure should be considered through the same 
questions. He closed by stating he looked forward to progressing the meeting and stood ready to participate 
effectively and constructively as necessary for successful outcomes from WCPFC19. 
21. 
New Caledonia congratulated the WCPFC Secretariat team and particularly the Executive Director 
for the work done to during the pandemic, stating it was pleased to be meeting in Da Nang, and expressed 
warm thanks to Vietnam’s authorities. It stated that COVID-19 has had major impacts on WCPFC tuna 
fisheries: observer coverage has fallen, historical longline fisheries targeting yellowfin have switched 
temporarily to albacore, the tuna market has been impacted, while the cost of fuel, fishing gear and freight 
have increased dramatically, everything has increased except tuna prices. New Caledonia’s longline fishery 
has been highly impacted. Although small, it provides fresh protein from the sea to New Caledonia’s 
population. New Caledonia stated the hope than the meeting would allow progress to be made on important 
topics, particularly on the management of South Pacific albacore, which is crucial for Pacific Island 
countries and territories, including New Caledonia.  
22. 
The Honourable Esa-Sharon Mona Ainu'u, Minister of Natural Resources, Government of Niue 
offered Niue’s appreciation and thanks to Vietnam for their warm hospitality, and gratitude to the Chair for 
her hard work, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. She stated that her presence in Da Nang was an 
illustration of the ongoing commitment of Niue to the WCPFC mission, stating that it was in honour of her 
people’s ancestors and future generations to ensure fishery resources in the WCPO are sustainable. She 
spoke of WCPFC’s collective responsibility to ensure that tuna resources are productive and sustainable, 
and stated that in support of this Niue had worked closely with other South Pacific CCMs to strengthen their 
cooperation and develop their common vision and collective capacity. She stated that the common purpose 
of the South Pacific Group would be become an important foundation for cooperation, and welcomed it 
establishment. She stated that cooperation at subregional, regional and RFMO levels was critical to Niue’s 
future. She stated that CCMs would have their own expectations and desired outcomes regarding the agenda 
before WCPFC19, and that Niue looked forward to decisions on the FFA’s priorities, with two particular 
concerns: as a South Pacific coastal state that is dependent on fisheries for food security, livelihoods, and 
revenue, there is a critical need to progress management of South Pacific albacore, and to rebuild the 
fishery’s profitability, and stated she looked forward to developing management objectives and a target 
reference point (TRP) for South Pacific albacore in 2023. She also spoke of the need to develop a process 
and workplan to establish limits and allocations for high seas purse seine fisheries that specifically 
recognizes the rights of SIDS and allows them to develop fisheries in the high seas. She stated that all could 
all share and successfully manage the WCPFC’s vital fishery if all CCMs cooperated and negotiated in good 
faith. 
23. 
The Honourable Steven Victor, Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Environment in Palau 
submitted his opening statement in which he thanked the people and the Socialist Government of Vietnam 
9  
  
for hosting WCPFC19 and for working with the Secretariat in making the excellent meeting arrangements.  
He acknowledged the Executive Director and congratulated him on his tenure. He stated he looked forward 
to working with his successor and assured the incoming Commission Executive Director of Palau’s 
continued support. He noted that members share deep concerns for the health of the ocean, and stated that 
Palau acknowledges the important role of a healthy ocean in supporting biodiversity that supports 
sustainable livelihoods and economic opportunities, and resilient food security. Palau supports the global 
goal of 30 x 30 for nature and people, and has demonstrated its support for such this global initiative through 
by implementing the Palau National Marine Sanctuary, banning deep sea mining, banning bottom trawling, 
and implementing a shark sanctuary. He stated that Palau has long understood the ocean-climate-nexus and 
the role that a healthy ocean plays in mitigating the impacts of climate change. He expressed Palau’s deep 
concern regarding the projected impact of climate change on its fisheries that will impact livelihoods, the 
economy and food security. Palau acknowledged and welcomed the proposal from the United States to 
further embed the discussion of climate change in the agendas of the Northern Committee (NC) and TCC, 
and stated this was an important opportunity to support the work of the WCPFC to improve our 
understanding of the impacts of climate on our fisheries and particularly, the management intervention and 
innovation in fisheries development that can help support future economic loss and loss of food security.  
Palau underscores the urgency of limiting global warming to within 1.5° Celsius by the end of this century 
to ensure that impacts to people, fisheries, and ocean biodiversity does not continue to inflict harm and 
burden on the most vulnerable communities. He stated Palau supports the proposal put forward by FFA 
members in WCPFC19-2022-DP04, which is an important step in toward full adoption of the harvest 
strategy approach by the WCPFC. He stated Palau believes that sufficient data on fishing activities within 
the WCPO will better inform policies and strategies to effectively control and monitor our tuna stocks, and 
indicated the Commission should take advantage of technical advances in fisheries management and 
monitoring; by adopting the proposed amendment to CMM 2013-05 on Daily Catch and Effort Reporting, 
the Commission can improve the quality of data for conducting stock assessments. He stated that Palau is 
one of the smallest members of the Commission and continues to struggle with the ever-increasing level of 
reporting required by the Commission in the implementation of the management obligations. As proposals 
are considered at WCPFC19, he stated Palau wished to raise the issue of the challenges faced by small 
administrations in dealing with additional reporting associated with management obligations, and 
encouraged members to seek efficient methods that can be automated to alleviate some of the reporting 
burden. He suggested this might be achieved through the use of electronic reporting as a minimum 
requirement, which could do much to streamlining electronic systems and the reporting burden for small 
administrations. The Minister stated that many CCMs would have heard him observe that “Tuna is the key 
to unlocking many opportunities of our small island states and our developing economies.” He urged CCMs 
to keep this in mind while WCPFC conducted its careful discussions on how to maintain and ensure 
sustainable management of the region’s healthy tuna stocks and healthy ocean while also assuring equitable 
benefit to the region’s people. He closed by stating he looked forward to a productive meeting at WCPFC19. 
24. 
Papua New Guinea congratulated the Government and the People of Vietnam for hosting 
WCPFC19, and stated PNG would focus on important issues at hand in emphasizing the importance of 
reaching consensus for the sustainability of key tuna stocks and other species within the WCPO. It stated 
that the resource is close to the hearts of PNG’s people, and sought to ensure future generations also benefit 
from the resources CCMs currently enjoy. PNG stressed the need for the Commission to be mindful of the 
obligations under CMM 2013-07 during its deliberations, noting the need to give full recognition to the 
special requirements of developing states, in particular SIDS and Territories, in relation to the conservation 
and management of highly migratory fish stocks in the WCPFC Convention Area and the development of 
their own fisheries for such stocks. PNG also stated the need to for the Commission to ensure a 
disproportionate burden of conservation action is not placed on SIDS and territories. PNG stated it considers 
the Harvest Strategy work for skipjack and the other tuna stocks to be a priority task, and stated the hope 
that WCPFC19 would have successful discussions and a good outcome on the Harvest Strategy for skipjack 
and the other tuna stocks. While noting more discussion would be required to progress work on the Harvest 
10  
  
Strategy for bigeye and yellowfin tuna, with further discussions among CCMs on the management objective 
and revised TRP for South Pacific albacore, PNG stated it was particularly eager to see the MP and a TRP 
for skipjack adopted at WCPFC19.  PNG stated that this is of critical importance, especially as PNG is 
pursuing a new fisheries strategic plan aimed at optimizing its benefits from the sustainable management 
and development of its tuna fishery. It encouraged the Commission not to be selfish in its discussions but to 
act in the best interest of member states, particularly SIDS and territories, taking into consideration the 
livelihoods and development aspirations that hinge on the decision made at WCPFC19. PNG noted with 
deep concern that SIDS faced the possible loss of millions of dollars and many jobs in the fisheries sector 
depending on the decisions made at WCPFC19 in regard to the adoption of a TRP and MP for skipjack, and 
discussions surrounding Harvest Strategy work on other tuna species. Regarding the CMS, while 
acknowledging the value of the scheme in improving compliance in the purse seine fishery, PNG stated it 
sees an imbalance in the CMS in terms of its monitoring of the different fisheries. The 100% observer 
coverage obligation and better reporting in the purse seine fishery places a spotlight on the fishery in terms 
of alleged infringements. This is a concern to PNG as it continues to invest significantly in domestic 
comprehensive management and MCS tools and regimes. PNG called on the Commission to cooperate and 
work together to prevent any form of bias or unfairness that the implementation of the CMS scheme may 
impose on members. It observed that the WCPFC is well known for its efforts to maintain a balance between 
conservation and sustainable development of Pacific stocks. PNG urged CCMs to seriously think about 
future generations and their right to enjoy the benefits of WCPO tuna stocks. 
25. 
The Honourable Maiava Fuimaono Tito Asafo, Associate Minister of Agriculture & Fisheries of the 
Independent State of Samoa, expressed on behalf of the Government of Samoa his appreciation to the host 
Government and people of Vietnam. He thanked the WCPFC Executive Director and his hard-working team 
for organizing the WCPFC annual meeting. He stated that at their 51st meeting in 2022 Pacific Island Forum 
Leaders endorsed the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent. The 2050 Strategy was deliberately 
designed as the overarching policy to strengthen collective action and deepen regionalism for the next three 
decades. At its heart is the centrality of ocean and our natural resources to our people, economies, social 
development, culture and livelihoods. He stated that is critical that we keep this at the forefront of our minds, 
and that for Samoa, a vibrant and sustainable fisheries sector continues to underpin national efforts to fully 
realize the Sustainable Development Goals, in particular SDG 14 ‘to conserve and sustainably use the 
oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development’ as well successful implementation of 
Samoa’s national development plan. He stated that Samoa had come to WCPFC19 with a renewed sense of 
dedication and commitment to work closely with the WCPFC Secretariat and Samoa’s development partners 
to bring about positive and effective progress in the sustainable management and conservation of its fisheries 
resources. He highlighted several key areas of critical importance to Samoa and other SIDS. They include 
firstly, the MP for South Pacific albacore. He noted that albacore is extremely important to Samoa, noting 
there has been a general decline in catch rates and vulnerable levels of spawning biomass for this stock over 
the years. He noted with great concern that the South Pacific albacore stock was projected to continuously 
decline under current conditions since 2015 and had a 17% chance of falling below the limit reference point 
(LRP) by 2018, and stated this must not be allowed to continue. He stated that the Commission is obligated 
to implement management measures to ensure the long-term sustainability of this resource. He thanked the 
Scientific Services Provider (SPC-OFP) for their hard work on this issue, and noted that the effective 
management of the southern longline fishery is of high importance to all CCMs targeting South Pacific 
albacore, and that Samoa is supportive and committed to the works to improve the management of this key 
fishery through the harvest strategy approach and implementation of zone-based management. He urged 
Commission members, particularly fishing partners interested in South Pacific albacore, to urgently develop 
an agreed, robust management arrangement, for that species, including progressing agreement on various 
elements of a harvest strategy, such as revising the interim TRP. Secondly, the CMS in which he noted 
relevant recommendations put forth and highlighted by TCC18 and referenced in WCPFC-2022-26. And 
thirdly, the WCPO Shark Stocks and By-Catch Mitigation matter in which he stated that this is a priority 
issue for Samoa. Samoa supported the recommendations put forward by SC18 and TCC18 and stated support 
11  
  
for the proposal from the USA and Canada on the review of the Sharks CMM 2019-04. He closed by 
reminding CCMs why that they were all present because they agreed to collaboratively work towards a 
common goal of ensuring that through consensus, they would agree to measures that will ensure the 
sustainable use of migratory tuna stocks and other species within the WCPO. 
26. 
Tuvalu presented a statement on behalf of the Honourable Kitiona Tausi, Minister of Fisheries and 
Trade, Government of Tuvalu who was delayed arriving in Da Nang. The Minister thanked the Government 
and people of Vietnam for their hospitality, congratulated the Chair for her achievements as Chair, and 
congratulated the Executive Director for his work at the Secretariat, and looked forward to welcoming him 
back home in Tuvalu. As the current chair of the PNA, the Minister joined other FFA and PNA members in 
urging WCPFC19 to approve their proposal and approve an interim MP for skipjack. He noted that the 
Commission was behind schedule in implementing harvest strategies, and stated that the proposal 
constituted a genuine and carefully considered effort to get things back on track. He noted that 
implementation of the proposal would signal a commitment to implementing harvest strategies for skipjack 
and other target tuna species, and that this was particularly important for securing valuable MSC 
certifications of WCPO fisheries. He also noted important proposals to improve management of longline 
fisheries, noting the proposal by the USA and Canada relating to banning of wire traces to reduce shark 
bycatch, and the proposal to require electronic reporting by longline vessels. He noted the requirements in 
place in Tuvalu’s EEZ, and stated that Tuvalu was getting tired of strengthening the management of longline 
fisheries in its EEZ while vessels move into the high seas to take advantage of the lack of control in those 
waters. He stated that management of fisheries in the high seas is the job of the WCPFC, and its reason for 
its existence. He noted the deployment of observers, stating that Tuvalu had relaxed COVID-19 restrictions, 
and that its Observer Programme was open for business.   
1.3 
Meeting Arrangements  
27. 
The Commission reviewed the meeting arrangements and indicative meeting schedule, and 
confirmed decisions made at the Heads of Delegation meeting, held on 27 November. The meeting schedule 
was agreed as outlined in WCPFC19-2022-01B which would be update on a daily basis. 
1.3.1 
Hybrid meeting protocols  
28. 
The Executive Director explained the key online meeting protocols as outlined in WCPFC19-2022-
02. He noted that all registered virtual participants would be able to see and hear all sessions, but only virtual 
participants from countries that have no Head of Delegation in Da Nang would be able to intervene virtually. 
1.3.2 
 
Establishment of small working groups (CNMs, CMR, others)  
29. 
The Commission agreed to establish eight small working groups (SWGs) as follows: 
i) 
CNM (led by Australia)  
ii) 
CMS Audit Points (led by RMI)  
iii) 
Labour standards (led by New Zealand and Indonesia)  
iv) 
South Pacific albacore (led by Fiji) 
v) 
Transhipment (led by USA and Vanuatu)  
vi) 
Skipjack management procedures in WCPFC19-2022-DP04 (led by RMI) 
vii) 
Southwest Pacific swordfish proposal in WCPFC19-2022-DP07 (led by Australia, to be 
confirmed) 
viii) 
Electronic reporting (ER) proposal in WCPFC19-2022-DP05 (led by New Zealand) 
 
12  
  
AGENDA ITEM 2   — ANNUAL REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR   
30. 
The Executive Director’s Annual Report (WCPFC19-2022-04), which is a requirement under Rule 
13 of the Commission’s Rules of Procedure, was issued on 14 October 2022, and was taken as read. The 
paper was posted on the WCPFC19 Online Discussion Forum (as Topic A), and no comments were received.  
31. 
Tuvalu, on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau, extended warm appreciation to the Executive Director 
for his stewardship of the organization over the past eight years, noting this was an unprecedented time in 
the short history of the WCPFC. Tuvalu drew attention to paragraph 57 of the report, and stated that while 
they welcomed the return of physical meetings, they also acknowledged that there was much work to catch 
up on and stated the need for a process to prioritize and schedule the work to be progressed. They stated that 
the priorities for the PNA and Tokelau for 2023 would be the negotiations of the tropic tuna measure, the 
intersessional work to improve longline MCS measures through transhipment monitoring, and the reshaping 
of the Compliance Monitoring Scheme. 
32. 
The Commission noted with appreciation the 2022 Annual Report of the Executive 
Director (WCPFC19-2022-04) and recognized the valuable service of the Executive Director, 
Feleti Penitala Teo OBE, during his tenure as Executive Director. 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 3  —  MEMBERSHIP AND OTHER APPLICATIONS 
3.1 
Status of the Convention 
33. 
New Zealand’s report as the Depositary on the status of the WCPF Convention (WCPFC19-2022-
05 Status of the Convention) was taken as read.  
34. 
The Commission noted with appreciation the report on the Status of the WCPFC 
Convention (WCPFC19-2022-05). 
 
3.2 
Update on Observer Status  
35. 
The Chair noted with appreciation the contributions of the accredited observers to the work of the 
Commission. The Secretariat’s updated report on observer status (WCPFC19-2022-06 List of Observers) 
was taken as read; it notes that no state or NGO observers were removed in 2022 under the requirements of 
Rule 36 of the Rules of Procedure.  
36. 
The Commission noted the updated list of observers to the Commission (WCPFC19-
2022-06 Rev 1).  
 
3.3 
Applications for Cooperating Non-Member (CNM) status  
37. 
The Commission considered applications for CNM status for 2023 in accordance with CMM 2019-
01, including recommendations from TCC18. As outlined in WCPFC19-2022-07: Cooperating Non-
Member Requests for 2023, there were eight applications for CNM status received in 2022 (from Curacao, 
Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Nicaragua, Panama, Thailand and Vietnam). All applicants are current CNMs 
in 2022. TCC18 considered the 8 applications and agreed to forward all applications to WCPFC19. The 
13  
  
TCC18 decisions and recommendations to WCPFC18 are in paragraph 8 of WCPFC19-2022-07. The 
Secretariat noted that all CNM contributions for 2021 and 2022 had been paid, as indicated in Table 2 of 
the paper. 
38. 
Tuvalu on behalf of FFA members stated that in light of the recommendations from TCC18, FFA 
members supported CNM renewal for Curacao, Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Thailand and Vietnam. They 
stated that for Nicaragua CNM status may be conferred for 2023, but that participatory rights for 2023 
should be considered separately under Agenda Item 3.3.1, and clearly specified based on the limits contained 
in WCPFC CMMs. They stated that for Panama, TCC18 identified a number of issues that needed to be 
addressed, particularly in relation to non-compliance with WCPFC CMMs. FFA members requested that 
these issues be considered by the CNM SWG in the first instance, noting in particular the limits prescribed 
in paragraph 42 of CMM 2021-01. 
39. 
The EU stated that TCC18 had expressed concerns regarding renewal of Panama’s CNM status, and 
that Panama was requested to provide additional information and confirm to the satisfaction of CCMs that 
the serious incidents involving Panama flagged vessels that had arisen elsewhere would not take place in 
the WCPFC Convention Area. The EU stated that as CCMs had not been able to review this information it 
would be difficult to make a decision, and encouraged Panama to make the requested information available 
as soon as possible. Japan also encouraged Panama to make the requested information available.  
40. 
The WCPFC Compliance Manger stated that Panama had not submitted additional information 
following the TCC18 meeting, and confirmed that information from Nicaragua had been posted to the 
Secretariat’s CNM webpage for consideration by CCMs. Nicaragua stated it sought to ensure that its vessels 
comply with the WCPFC CMMs, and requested that the Commission indicate what additional information 
it required. In response the Chair stated that Nicaragua had provided some information, which would be 
considered by the SWG. 
41. 
Panama expressed its appreciation to the Executive Director for his work on behalf of the 
Commission.  
42. 
The Commission noted and accepted the applications for CNM status in 2022 from Curacao, 
Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Nicaragua, Panama, Thailand and Vietnam. A SWG was established, chaired 
by Australia. The Chair noted that in accordance with the WCPFC’s established practice, the SWG would 
provide advice to the Commission on the participatory rights of CNMs. The Commission agreed that 
applicants could attend the SWG to provide clarifications and answers to questions that might be posed. 
Following its deliberations, the SWG would provide advice to the Commission on the participatory rights 
of CNMs (under Agenda Item 3.3.1). 
43. 
 The EU stated that it welcomed political expressions of commitment towards a more effective fight 
against IUU fishing activities in high level conferences, or as recently during the FAO Committee on 
Fisheries (COFI) plenary meeting in Rome in September 2022. The EU referenced a situation that it stated 
involved testing of actual willingness to fight IUU fishing. The EU stated that it was concerned to note that 
although Panama reported that the vessel that triggered the concern of TCC18 was being monitored, the 
EU’s investigation suggested that the vessel was actually at sea. It stated it had no indication that Panama 
detected this situation before the EU’s bilateral exchange with Panama, and noted that the letter reporting 
this situation to the NPFC Secretariat was sent after the bilateral exchange between the EU and Panama. 
The EU stated that it was both worrying and disappointing that Panama did not ensure proper reporting to 
WCPFC, especially when taking into consideration the level of attention that could be expected on this 
vessel. The EU confirmed, in that respect, its substantial reservations regarding Panama’s ability to monitor 
the activities of its fleet. In the spirit of cooperation but reluctantly, the EU stated it would not block the 
agreement to grant Panama CNM status. However, it highlighted that all actions would be taken into account 
14  
  
next year as the CNM SWG proposed. In that respect, the EU specifically encouraged Panama to ensure the 
settlement of the sanctions imposed before any removal of the vessel from the registry, in line with 
Paragraph 24 of the FAO Guidelines for Flag State Performance. Moreover, the EU noted that other WCPFC 
CCMs had and have a relevant role to play. The EU stated with deep regret that China, as port State, seemed 
to have been unable to effectively act against an IUU third-country flagged vessel in its port despite a 
prohibition for sailing and a request of support by the flag State. The EU also called on Chinese Taipei, 
which is a member of WCPFC and NPFC, to actively monitor the vessel as the last known position (dated 
23 November) would be only 10 nautical miles from Kaohsiung port. 
44. 
Chinese Taipei stated that as a responsible member of both WCPFC and NPFC it had already taken 
actions to monitor the vessels. It noted that its policy was to not allow vessels on an IUU list to use its ports. 
It stated that because the vessels were located near Chinese Taipei’s waters, it would continue to monitor 
their activities and share that information with relevant CCMs. 
45. 
China referenced the EU’s statement that mentioned that China should play its due role as a port 
state. China stated that it believes that the mention of China in this statement has nothing to do with this 
item and is not constructive, and that it was incomprehensible and unacceptable for the EU statement to 
mention China. China stated that the WCPFC should not waste time talking about the issues of other 
organizations. China stated it attaches great importance to and has taken active measures on combating IUU 
fishing activities in close cooperation with the international community. It noted that the Chinese fisheries 
authority actively carried out domestic coordination among agencies and had been in close communication 
with Panama regarding this particular vessel. In accordance with Panama’s requirements, the port authority 
was urged to postpone approval of the vessel's entry into port and make preparations for port inspection. 
The carrier then left the outer anchorage of the port on its own. Later, China approved the entry and 
inspection of another Panamanian carrier that applied to call at a Chinese port. China stated it would continue 
to maintain communication regarding the two carriers with Panama and the EU through bilateral channels 
and continue to work closely with all parties to jointly combat IUU fishing activities. 
46. 
The Commission approved the applications for CNM status for 2023 from Curaçao, 
Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Nicaragua, Panama, Thailand and Vietnam. 
47. 
WCPFC19 noted the significant concerns expressed by TCC18 regarding recent serious 
incidents involving Panama’s flagged vessels in the NPFC Convention area. The Commission 
noted that Panama provided further information to the Commission requested by TCC18, 
including evidence of Panama’s submission of relevant information to NPFC to include the 
flagged vessel on the NPFC IUU vessel list.  
48. 
WCPFC19 reiterated TCC18’s reminder to encourage Panama to make efforts to make 
improvements to the management of its vessels. WCPFC tasks TCC19 to consider the outcome 
of NPFC IUU listing process and further efforts on Panama’s improvements to manage and 
monitor its vessels when considering Panama’s CNM application in 2023. The Commission 
noted the NPFC IUU listing process was ongoing and as such, recommends the approval of the 
renewal of Panama's CNM status for 2023. 
 
3.3.1 
Participatory rights of CNMs   
49. 
The Commission reviewed the limits of participatory rights of CNMs under various CMMs in 
accordance with paragraphs 12 and 13 of CMM 2019-01.  The Commission considered the findings of the 
CNM SWG, which recommended that Curacao, Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Nicaragua, Panama, 
15  
  
Thailand and Vietnam retain the same participatory rights in 2022 as they had in 2021. The CNM SWG also 
noted that in both 2020 and 2021, Nicaragua requested that the CNM SWG and the Commission consider 
revising their participatory rights to increase purse seine fishing from one to two vessels. Nicaragua 
indicated that the addition of one vessel would greatly assist in allowing the timely submission of financial 
contributions and further enhance their ability to implement WCPFC CMMs in the WCPFC Convention 
Area. CNM SWG participants were again unable to support the requested addition to Nicaragua’s 
participatory rights for 2023 due to the existing purse seine capacity limits as stipulated in paragraph 42 of 
the current TTM (CMM 2021-01). However, to assist the Commission with considering any increased 
participatory rights in the future, the CNM SWG invited Nicaragua to put forward any proposed changes to 
participatory rights when submitting their CNM application in future years, to allow TCC to properly 
consider the implications of such a request prior to the Commission’s annual meeting. 
50. 
WCPFC19 considered the request for participatory rights of CNM for 2023. The SWG 
considered an application from Nicaragua to increase its purse seine capacity from one vessel 
to two vessels. The Commission noted that the request has implications for capacity limits under 
paragraph 42 of CMM 2021-01 and recommended that any further capacity increase is 
considered when the relevant CMM is reviewed. 
51. 
WCPFC19 approved the following participatory rights for 2023:   
i. 
Curaçao: The participatory rights of Curacao are limited to carrier vessels to 
engage in transhipment activities in the Convention area.  
ii. 
Ecuador: The participatory rights of Ecuador for fishing in the WCPO are 
limited to purse seine fishing, with no participatory rights for fishing on the high 
seas for highly migratory fish stocks in the Convention Area. Any introduction 
of purse seine fishing capacity is to be in accordance with paragraph 12 of CMM 
2019-01 and CMM 2021-01 or its replacement measure.  
iii. 
El Salvador: The participatory rights of El Salvador for fishing in the WCPO 
are limited to purse seine fishing only. The total level of effort by purse seine 
vessels of El Salvador on the high seas shall not exceed 29 days in the Convention 
Area. Any introduction of purse seine fishing capacity is to be in accordance with 
paragraph 12 of CMM 2019-01 and CMM 2021-01 or its replacement measure.  
iv. 
Liberia: The participatory rights of Liberia are limited to carrier vessels to 
engage in transhipment activities in the Convention area.  
v. 
Nicaragua: The participatory rights of Nicaragua are limited to purse seine 
fishing for one vessel, with no participatory rights for fishing on the high seas for 
highly migratory fish stocks in the Convention Area. Any introduction of fishing 
capacity is to be in accordance with paragraph 12 of CMM 2019-01 and CMM 
2021-01 or its replacement measure.  
vi. 
Panama: The participatory rights of Panama in the WCPO are limited to the 
provision of carrier and bunker vessels. Panama’s participatory rights also apply 
to vessels that supply food, water and spare parts to carrier vessels that engage in 
transhipment activities, provided that these vessels do not engage in activities 
supporting fishing vessels, including providing and/or servicing FADs.  
16  
  
vii. 
Thailand: The participatory rights of Thailand in the WCPO are limited to the 
provision of carrier and bunker vessels only.  
viii. 
Vietnam: The participatory rights of Vietnam in the WCPO are limited to the 
provision of carrier and bunker vessels only.  
WCPFC/IATTC Overlap Area 
52. 
In accordance with the decision of WCPFC9 regarding the management of the overlap 
area of 4˚S and 50˚S between 130˚W and 150˚W, vessels flagged to Ecuador, El Salvador and 
Nicaragua and Panama will be governed by the IATTC when fishing in the overlap area.   
53. 
In accordance with the Data Exchange MOU agreed by both Commissions, fishing 
vessels flying the flag of a member of either the IATTC or WCPFC shall cooperate with the 
RFMO to which they are not a member by voluntarily providing operational catch and effort 
data for its fishing activities for highly migratory species in the overlap area.   
54. 
For the purpose of investigation of possible IUU fishing activities and consistent with 
international and domestic laws, vessels flying the flag of a CNM that is a Contracting Party to 
the IATTC will cooperate with those coastal State members of the WCPFC whose EEZs occur 
in the overlap area by voluntarily providing VMS reports (date, time and position) to those 
coastal States when operating in the overlap area. 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 4  — NEW PROPOSALS   
55. 
In introducing this agenda item, the Chair noted that proponents of new proposals would provide 
brief outlines, and requested that CCMs limit comments to general statements and questions intended to 
clarify the proposals. She stated that WCPFC19-2022-DP12 Information Paper on the Bycatch of Pacific 
Bluefin Tuna in Set Net Fisheries in its Territorial Waters and WCPFC19-2022-DP15 Keeping track of 
Albatrosses were for information purposes and would be considered under the relevant agenda items, while 
WCPFC19-2022-DP11 Options for a Baseline of the “Large-Fish” Handline Fishery Fishing in 
Indonesia’s EEZ With Vessels >30GT for the WCPFC Tropical Tuna Measure would be introduced and 
considered under Agenda Item 6.3.1.2.  
Proposed Revisions to the CMM for Sharks (WCPFC19-2022-DP01) 
 
56. 
The USA introduced proposed revisions to the CMM for Sharks (CMM 2019-04) as detailed in 
WCPFC19-2022-DP01 Proposed Revisions to the Conservation and Management Measure for Sharks. The 
USA stated it was pleased to present the proposal to the Commission, noting that oceanic whitetips are 
experiencing overfishing and are overfished, and silky sharks are overfished. It stated it had revised the 
measure as recommended by SC17, SC18, and TCC18. It detailed the changes to the proposal, and stated 
that if adopted the new provisions would go into effect in January 2024. The USA stated it had examined 
WCPFC regional observer data, which showed extra-tropical interactions with these species, and that the 
proposal consequently would apply the proposed mitigation measures across the entire WCPFC Convention 
Area.  
57. 
Cook Islands on behalf of FFA members, thanked the USA and Canada for this proposal and the 
completed CMM 2013-06 assessment, which they stated was thorough, and provided ample consideration 
17  
  
of the potential impacts on SIDS. They stated that this is an important issue for FFA members, and noted 
that the use of wire traces and shark lines by longline vessels operating within FFA members’ waters is 
already prohibited through the Harmonised Minimum Terms and Conditions, and that all sharks landed by 
vessels licensed to fish in FFA waters and those flagged to FFA require all fins to be naturally attached, or 
that finning is managed under alternative measures. However, they queried how the Commission would 
monitor the clause on trailing gear as prescribed in the proposed CMM, and stated they looked forward to 
further discussions on the proposal. 
58. 
The EU acknowledged the efforts of the USA and Canada to reduce mortality for these species. It 
noted that a retention ban is in place, but stated that identifying additional mitigation measures can provide 
additional conservation benefits. The EU stated that its previous comments seem to not have been taken into 
account and expressed the hope that it would be possible to better capture the scientific advice and concerns 
that had been expressed. 
59. 
Canada reiterated its support for the measure, which it stated is based on the best available science. 
To ensure the safety of crew and have the best survival rate for sharks, it noted that it is very important to 
have the information for safe handling practices. It stated that there is a need to demonstrate that WCPFC 
takes its responsibility for conservation of shark species very seriously, noting recent decisions by other 
international fora regarding shark conservation. 
60. 
Chinese Taipei thanked the USA and Canada for their proposal, and sought clarification regarding 
paragraph 16, which indicates CCMs shall ensure their vessels do not carry or use wire traces, inquiring 
what constituted a vessel in the definition. The USA stated that vessels constituted those engaged in longline 
fisheries targeting tuna and billfish, noting this is referenced in paragraph 14 of the proposal. 
61. 
RMI stated it supports the proposal. Regarding the Cook Islands’ comment, RMI stated FFA 
members had minimum terms and conditions for their in-zone fisheries and that there was a need for WCPFC 
to develop compatible measures.    
62. 
Indonesia stated that this was a challenge for it to implement, noting it still faced problems caused 
by COVID-19. 
63. 
The Chair encouraged CCMs to engage with each other to resolve the outstanding issues.  
64. 
This issue was further considered under Agenda Item 8.1.2. 
Strengthening and Revising CMM 2009-06 in 2023 (WCPFC19-2022-DP02) 
65. 
 The USA introduced its proposal to strengthen and revise CMM 2009-06 on Transhipment in 2023 
(WCPFC19-2022-DP02 Strengthening and Revising WCPFC CMM 2009-06 on Transhipment in 2023).  
The United States stated it remains concerned about the risks that transhipment represents in relation to 
supporting illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing operations and other criminal activities. To 
address this concern, the USA stated it supports to strengthening CMM 2009-06 to help address such 
concerns. It stated that at WCPFC15 the Commission agreed to conduct a review of CMM 2009-06, forming 
the TS-IWG to take on this task. Members agreed in the Scope of Work that the TS-IWG would seek to 
improve the regulation and monitoring of transhipment activities by “recommending amendments or other 
actions, if any, related to CMM 2009-06.” In September 2022, the 35th session of the United Nations’ Food 
and Agriculture Organization’s (FAO) Committee on Fisheries (COFI) adopted voluntary guidelines on 
transhipment. These guidelines were developed over the course of several years through expert, technical, 
and member consultations. The COFI Voluntary Guidelines on Transshipment seek to decrease the risk of 
IUU caught fish entering the global seafood supply chain, and would strengthen sustainable and socially 
responsible fisheries. Most WCPFC members, including the United States, worked to develop the FAO 
18  
  
Guidelines on Transhipment with the objective that the Voluntary Guidelines would “assist States, regional 
fisheries management organizations (RFMOs), and other intergovernmental organizations, with respect to 
their development of new transhipment regulations or the review of existing regulations, with a view to 
integrating these within the broader regulatory framework for fisheries management.” The USA proposed 
that the TS-IWG be tasked with (a) reviewing CMM 2009-06 prior to TCC19; (b) considering the COFI 
guidelines, ensuring any proposed revisions align with or are more stringent than the guidelines, and taking 
into account the unique circumstances of small island developing states and territories; (c) meeting prior to 
TCC19 to prepare a draft proposed revisions to CMM 2009-06; and (d) presenting proposed revisions for 
consideration by WCPFC20. 
66. 
RMI, on behalf of FFA members, thanked the USA for WCPFC19-2022-DP02, and stated that while 
recognising that the recommendations seek to progress the review of the Transhipment CMM, they also 
noted that there are terms of reference already in place that contain a clear process of activities, methodology 
and scheduling to guide the work of the Transhipment-IWG. While they supported the recommendations in 
principle, they stated they had clarifying questions and comments and looked forward to working with the 
USA to address those, including clarification from the TS-IWG Chairs on whether the transhipment analysis 
will be available by the first quarter of 2023, and regarding recommendation (b), emphasised that the revised 
Transhipment CMM would need to take into account the areas of assistance under ‘Recognition of the 
special requirements of small island developing states’ of Article 30 of the WCPFC Convention and in the 
FAO Voluntary Guidelines, as well as the need for a CMM 2013-06 assessment. 
67. 
The EU supported the proposal, and expressed appreciation for the ongoing efforts on transhipment. 
It stated it looked forward to finally addressing the issue, in combination with the recently adopted FAO 
guidelines. 
68. 
The Chair inquired of the TS-IWG Chair if the analysis would be available in the first quarter 2023? 
The Co-Chair stated that timeline is early 2023, but that a specific date had not been set, but would be 
discussed by the IWG.  
69. 
 China suggested the meeting prior to TCC19 referenced in the proposed recommendation should 
not be restricted to being “in person”.  
70. 
Indonesia stated it was very important to have an in-person meeting, and thanked the USA 
delegation for the proposal, and stated it would participate in the discussion.  
71. 
The Chair noted that the Commission had heard positive comments and some concerns, and noted 
application of Article 30 and CMM 2013-06. 
72. 
Further discussions regarding the work of the TS-IWG were held under Agenda Item 11.4.2. 
FFA Positions on Key Issues for WCPFC19 (WCPFC19-2022-DP03) 
 
73. 
Kiribati on behalf of FFA members introduced WCPFC19-2022-DP03 FFA Positions on Key 
Issues for WCPFC19, noting that FFA members priorities were also elaborated in WCPFC19-2022-DP04, 
-DP05, -DP06, -DP07, and -DP08. They highlighted their priorities and expected outcomes for WCPFC19 
as follows: 
i) 
Agree to a management procedure for skipjack tuna in the WCPO, an important step in the 
effective management and sustainable use of the stock as detailed in WCPFC19-2022-
DP04. 
19  
  
ii) 
Amend CMM 2014-06 on Establishing a Harvest Strategy for Key Fisheries and Stocks in 
the Western and Central Pacific Ocean to satisfy a requirement of the Marine Stewardship 
Council and ensure our fisheries retain their MSC certification, as detailed in WCPFC19-
2022-DP06. 
iii) 
Adopt a strengthened Southwest Pacific swordfish measure, as detailed in WCPFC19-2022-
DP07. 
iv) 
Agree on a focused process for reviewing the TTM in 2023 to adopt hard limits for the 
purse seine fishery in the high seas. 
v) 
Agree on a focused process for South Pacific albacore in 2023 to improve the management 
of this fishery, including agreement to review the management objective and TRP. 
vi) 
Amend CMM 2013-05 to require CCMs to routinely report their high seas catch and effort 
data in recognition that electronic reporting is a timely and more accurate way to provide 
this critical information, as detailed in WCPFC19-2022-DP05. 
vii) 
Assist the Commission in adopting EM SSPs; in support of this, FFA members provided 
their interim EM SSPs in WCPFC19-2022-DP08. 
viii) 
Continue to review and enhance the CMS. 
ix) 
Continue to progress the development of an effective CMM for improving labour standards 
for crew. 
x) 
Safely redeploy our observers from 1 January 2023. 
 
FFA members stated they were ready to work with the Chair and other CCMs to ensure that WCPFC19 
advances the work in support of the overall conservation and management of WCPO fish stocks. 
Draft CMM on a Management Procedure for WCPO Skipjack Tuna (WCPFC19-2022-DP04) 
 
74. 
FSM on behalf of FFA members introduced WCPFC19-2022-WP04 Draft Conservation and 
Management Measure on a Management Procedure for WCPO Skipjack Tuna, stating that in accordance 
with obligations under CMM 2014-06 (calling for the WCPFC to develop and implement harvest strategies 
for key stocks), FFA members were pleased to submit a draft CMM that describes an interim MP for skipjack 
tuna in the WCPO. They stated that the proposed interim MP is designed to improve decision-making by 
specifying predetermined levels of fishing on the WCPO skipjack tuna stock, based on the performance of 
the fishery. They indicated that this would better account for uncertainty, including uncertainties related to 
climate change, and would also be an important step in ensuring the effective management and sustainable 
use of the stock, and meeting the interests of global markets in sourcing sustainable tuna products. They 
noted that the draft CMM had been assessed against the requirements of CMM 2013-06. 
75. 
Tuvalu on behalf of the PNA thanked FFA members for their introduction of the proposal, which 
they stated draws heavily on work by SPC and contributions from other delegations at SC and SMD01. 
They thanked all those who had contributed ideas on a skipjack MP. They noted that that the proposal 
followed the approach suggested by the PNA and Tokelau at SMD01, and includes a full skipjack MP with 
all the elements SPC has laid out. They noted some flexibility was needed to get the skipjack MP started, 
and stated that WCPFC19-2022-DP04 therefore proposes adoption of an interim skipjack MP with some 
flexibility about how it would be used. This would give all CCMs the opportunity to work with the skipjack 
MP until they are comfortable with adopting it fully. It might also allow some elements that are not yet fully 
detailed or agreed to be further developed over time. They stated they looked forward to working with other 
CCMs towards the adoption of this proposal.   
76. 
The USA thanked the FFA members, and stated it had shared some questions directly with them 
and looked forward to resolving these with the objective of finalizing the MP at WCPFC19. 
20  
  
77. 
Japan stated it appreciated the proposal, and that it had some concerns it would like to discuss under 
the appropriate agenda item, and stated it would be pleased to work with other CCMs on this. 
78. 
The EU thanked FFA members for tabling the proposal, noting it was the result of many years of 
collaborative work, which the EU had supported. It stated it was very happy that WCPFC was close to 
adopting an MP. It noted it had some technical questions, but hoped that WCPFC19 could adopt and fully 
implement the MP. 
79. 
Indonesia thanked FFA for providing WCPFC19-2022-DP04, stating it would like to have more 
understanding and discussion of the harvest control rule (HCR), which appeared different from the 
procedure presented by SPC. It stated it was interested in better understanding the treatment of catch and 
effort in archipelagic waters. 
80. 
RMI stated it would lead a SWG to address the issues, because this was a key priority for FFA 
members. It stated that the goal would be to achieve consensus support for an outcome by the end of 
WCPFC19. 
81. 
The Chair stated that the proposal would be more fully discussed under Agenda Item 6.2.  
Proposed Amendment to CMM 2013-05 (WCPFC19-2022-DP05) 
 
82. 
New Zealand on behalf of FFA members introduced WCPFC19-2022-DP05 Proposed Amendment 
to CMM 2013-05 on Daily Catch and Effort Reporting. They noted that a proposal was tabled at WCPFC12 
which led to adoption of CMM 2013-05. That proposal required vessel operators to maintain daily catch 
records; daily catch logs were required in FFA members’ EEZs, but the proposal at the time aimed to create 
an explicit requirement for such records to be kept for high seas fishing activities to improve the quality of 
data available for stock assessments. This led to the adoption by WCPFC12 of CMM 2013-05 on Daily 
Catch and Effort Reporting. New Zealand stated that FFA members were pleased to submit WCPFC19-
2022-DP05, which proposes to amend CMM 2013-05 (and also contains a 2013-06 assessment). In 
summary, it proposes to require the master of a vessel to keep an accurate electronic log, and provide this 
information in accordance with the agreed WCPFC Standards, Specifications and Procedures (SSPs) for 
Electronic Reporting for operational catch and effort data to the national authority within 15 days of the end 
of the trip or upon exit from the WCPFC Convention Area, and where applicable, at the end of every 
transhipment event. In addition, the proposed amendment includes a requirement for flag CCMs to submit 
the required information to the Commission electronically in accordance with the agreed SSPs within 30 
days of the end of a trip or upon exit from the WCPFC Convention Area; and where applicable at the end 
of every transhipment event. The proposed new requirement would be to submit these data to the 
Commission on a routine basis. FFA members stated that one of the benefits of ER is the ability to access 
the data in a timely manner. Having these data transmitted to the Commission on a routine basis would allow 
timely access by the Scientific Services Provider (SPC) as well as the WCPFC Secretariat for the science 
and compliance-related work of the Commission. They stated that they recognise that national authorities 
would want to vet the data submitted by their flagged vessels, which is why the timing for the reporting 
from flag vessels to their national authority is within 15 days and from national authority or CCMs to the 
Commission is within 30 days of the end of the trip, or upon exit from the WCPFC Convention Area, and 
where applicable at the end of a transhipment event. They noted that the proposed amendment does not 
replace the requirement to submit operational data by 30 April each year for the previous year. The 
submission of scientific data by 30 April would then be used by the Scientific Services Provider (SPC) to 
reconcile with what has been submitted routinely throughout the year. FFA members together with other 
CCMs at TCC18 recommended that WCPFC19 agree that CCMs should submit operational catch and effort 
data in accordance with the agreed Standards, Specifications and Procedures for Electronic Reporting in the 
WCPFC from 1 January 2024. FFA members also made this proposal at TCC17 (TCC17 Summary Report 
21  
  
paragraph 136), but stated that their efforts at TCC17 and TCC18 met with some opposition. The reason 
given was that some CCMs need time in order to be able to implement ER, and in recognition of this concern 
the CMM has a delayed implementation date of 1 January 2024. FFA members noted that they had already 
made a commitment to implement ER, while the PNA and Tokelau are already implementing ER for the 
purse seine fishery in their waters through their fishery management information system (FIMS). Vessel 
operators enter their data into FIMS daily and the relevant parties (authorities/vessel operator) are able to 
access this from the system immediately. FFA members stated that from the Annual Report on the 
performance of ER standards that was tabled to TCC18 (TCC18-2022-RP10), a number of CCMs are 
already implementing ER, including for their longline fleets. FFA members noted that WCPFC has talked 
about ER for a number of years, and stated it was time that it be put into place. They noted that FFA members 
had already made a commitment to adopt ER for fishing vessels fishing within its EEZs, and that this 
proposal is to put compatible measures in place for the high seas as called for by Article 8 of the Convention.  
83. 
Japan supported the general approach, but stated it has some difficulties with the provisions as 
drafted. It stated it would raise these under the detailed discussions.  
84. 
The USA stated it was in favour of adopting ER but had some concerns with how this could be 
adopted domestically, and would discuss the issues further. 
85. 
The EU stated it was sympathetic in principle, and noted that its fleet already reports electronically, 
but that it had some concerns regarding the standards to be used. It stated it would welcome discussions 
with the proponents during WCPFC19.  
86. 
China thanked FFA members for the proposal. It inquired why these suggested measures would 
apply only to the high seas, given that FFA members indicated they had already made a commitment to use 
ER in their EEZs. China suggested in that case the CMM should not be limited to the high seas. Regarding 
paragraph 3, coincidentally, China stated its fisheries would require daily ER reporting for all vessels 
operating in the high seas as of 1 January 2024. Thus, China would have little difficulty with that paragraph, 
although some domestic circumstances would need to be considered, such as instances where the ER 
equipment was not functioning, in which case a 30-day exemption might be allowed, similar to the situation 
of the WCPFC VMS system. China stated the details could be discussed with FFA directly. It stated it had 
issues with paragraph 4, noting that if the data were required for stock assessments, the stock assessment 
cycle is every 3 years, which indicates there is no urgency to acquire the data. The Chair encouraged China 
to work directly with New Zealand. 
87. 
PNG, on behalf of PNA and Tokelau, stated they strongly support this proposal. They noted that the 
lack of effective control over longline fishing on the high seas is the single biggest weakness in the work of 
the Commission, and that this was a simple proposal that would contribute to addressing that weakness. 
They stated that the PNA and Tokelau already receive ER through the PNA FIMS, covering around 1.5 
million tonnes of catch annually, or about 60% of the total catch of the major tuna stocks in the WCPO, and 
about 80% of the total catch excluding catches in Indonesia and Philippines waters. They stated that given 
that this was possible, the Commission had no excuse not to also implement ER. PNG stated that the PNA 
and Tokelau strongly supported the proposal.  
88. 
Chinese Taipei stated it had implemented ER for many years in its distant water fishing fleet, with 
vessels required to report catch daily to the fisheries monitoring center. It stated it had some technical 
questions, which it would seek to discuss at WCPFC19, in the hope a mutually acceptable outcome could 
be found.  
89. 
Indonesia noted the importance of operational catch and effort data, and stated that it had a plan to 
operate fisheries in the high seas in the future. It noted it had concerns about reporting to the Commission 
22  
  
within 30 days, and inquired whether the data reporting was for the purpose of stock assessments, or 
compliance, as this would have implications for timing. 
90. 
Korea stated it supported ER should be in place for the entire WCPFC Convention Area as soon as 
practical, but stated that it was very important to ensure the compatibility between EEZs and the high seas 
in implementing ER. Korea noted that vessels should not have to implement two different standards in these 
areas. It inquired whether the existing system in FFA EEZs is consistent with the requirements for the 
Commission in the high seas, and stated it looked forward to addressing these issues in the SWG.   
91. 
Following further discussions among CCMs in the ER SWG, led by New Zealand, the Chair noted 
the many positive comments and general support among CCMs, but observed that there were some concerns 
and technical details to be worked out. 
Proposed Amendment to CMM 2014-06 (WCPFC19-2022-DP06) 
 
92. 
PNG on behalf of FFA members introduced WCPFC19-2022-DP06 Proposed Amendment to CMM 
2014-06 on Establishing a Harvest Strategy for Key Fisheries and Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific 
Ocean, stating that FFA members proposed to amend CMM 2014-06 by including text that satisfies a 
specific requirement of the MSC Fishery Standard. The MSC allows for conditional certification of fisheries 
under its standard if there exists an agreement or framework that requires the relevant management body 
(WCPFC) to adopt HCRs before the stock declines below BMSY. They stated that the proposed amendment 
to the CMM did not alter the broader and more important requirement for the WCPFC to adopt well-defined 
HCRs for each of the tropical tuna stocks, but ensures that over 40 certified WCPO fisheries for South 
Pacific albacore, bigeye, skipjack and yellowfin will retain their certification while the work required to 
adopt well-defined HCRs is undertaken within the timeframe and to a standard required by MSC. 
93. 
The proposal was further addressed under Agenda Item 7. 
Revised Draft CMM for Southwest Pacific Swordfish (WCPFC19-2022-DP07) 
 
94. 
Australia on behalf of FFA members introduced WCPFC19-2022-DP07 A Revised draft 
Conservation and Management Measure for Southwest Pacific Swordfish in the WCPFC Area, stating that 
FFA members were pleased to propose a strengthened CMM for Southwest Pacific swordfish highlighting: 
zone-based management, compatible management and limits for the high seas, sovereign rights of coastal 
states, and special requirements of SIDS and participating territories. They stated that the current CMM for 
Southwest Pacific swordfish does not address key elements required to ensure ongoing successful 
management of the swordfish fishery. Specifically, it contains no restrictions on fishing mortality on the 
high seas north of 20°S, lacks overall provisions to ensure sustainability of the stock, does not protect future 
development opportunities for SIDS, and does not distinguish between the fisheries targeting swordfish and 
fisheries for which swordfish is an important economic bycatch. They stated that they looked forward to 
working with members during WCPFC19 to progress the measure to meet the proposed objective and 
principles detailed in WCPFC19-2022-DP07. 
95. 
The EU thanked Australia for the proposal. It agreed that the current CMM does not effectively 
cover all the fishery components that impact the stock, and stated there is scope for including all fishing 
north of 20°S. The EU stated it was committed to assisting Australia in doing this, but noted that the proposal 
included a number of elements that would make this rather challenging. The EU stated that the main 
objective should be to improve the current CMM.  
96. 
China stated that during a bilateral meeting before the WCPFC19 it had expressed its concerns, 
including the need for a strong scientific basis for the total allowable catch (TAC). It agreed on the need to 
23  
  
allocate bycatch, but remarked on the need for a longer period for the average. Regarding the target fisheries 
for Southwest Pacific swordfish, it stated that observer coverage should be compatible between the high 
seas and EEZs. Regarding EM and the review rate, China hoped this could be decided after the 
Commission’s decision on EM.  
97. 
This proposal was further considered under Agenda Item 6.8.2. 
FFA Final Draft EM SSPs, endorsed as Interim Guidelines (WCPFC19-2022-DP08) 
 
98. 
FSM on behalf of FFA members introduced WCPFC19-2022-DP08 Information Paper on the FFA 
Final Draft EM SSPs endorsed as Interim Guidelines, stating that FFA members were committed to 
strengthening the monitoring of fisheries under the jurisdiction of the Commission, particularly those that 
lack independent verifiable data. They noted FFA members worked hard to progress EM and acknowledged 
the complexities of this work. FFA members progressed the development of EM SSPs over the prior 12 
months. In May 2022, FFC122 endorsed the FFA Final Draft EM SSPs as interim guidelines, noting these 
will continue to be reviewed and revised as members work to implement EM across FFA-member 
EEZs. FFA members stated that they were pleased to share this work with the WCPFC, as an information 
paper (WCPFC19-2022-DP08), to help progress the work on the development of EM SSPs by the ER&EM 
Working Group and with the aim of ensuring compatibility and complementarity of EM frameworks across 
the WCPFC Convention Area. 
Measure to be implemented by the Philippines in the high seas adjacent to its EEZ (WCPFC19-2022-
DP09) and Desire to Prescribe the Use of Carrier Vessels with Freezing Capacity in HSP1-SMA 
(WCPFC19-2022-DP10) 
 
99. 
The Philippines introduced WCPFC19-2022-DP09 Informing the Commission of the Measure that 
the Philippines will implement in the High Seas Adjacent to the EEZ of the Philippines and WCPFC19-
2022-DP10 Informing the Commission of the desire to Prescribe the Use of Carrier Vessels with Freezing 
Capacity in High Seas Pockets 1 Special management Area (HSP1-SMA).  
100. 
Palau on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau stated regarding DP09 that they needed more information 
to consider the proposal, noting for example, that the proposal refers to fishing activity in the high seas 
adjacent to the EEZ east of the Philippines. However, they stated they were unaware of any WCPFC CMM 
providing for access by Philippines vessels to any areas of the high seas adjacent to the EEZ east of the 
Philippines. They noted that they are aware of the important Special Arrangement for traditional group seine 
vessel operations in High Seas Pocket 1, but stated that area isn’t adjacent to the Philippines EEZ. They 
reiterated their particular concern regarding additional fishing impacts in the area indicated by the 
Philippines, and requested further information before considering the proposal further.  
101. 
Kiribati on behalf of FFA members stated that the Philippines had sought to get access for boats 
with freezers on the high seas on several occasions in the last few years, but stated that this was contrary to 
the original intent of Attachment 2 of CMM 2021-01, which was focused on the operations of traditional 
fishers. FFA members stated that if Philippine freezer boats are allowed in High Seas Pocket 1, they are 
likely to displace the majority of traditional fishers. It is also likely to result in a significant increase in 
fishing effort in this area, as they will be able to stay on the fishing grounds for much longer, potentially 
affecting the sustainability of tuna stocks. They also raised concerns that this may result in an expansion of 
fishing operations into High Sea Pocket 2. FFA members noted that the use of refrigerated carriers is likely 
to have an impact on SIDS members and participating territories in the WCPFC Convention Area, but the 
Philippines has not provided an assessment meeting the requirements of CMM 2013-06.  FFA members 
stated that they do not support the proposal. 
24  
  
102. 
Following further discussions during WCPFC19 between the Philippines and other CCMs regarding 
WCPFC19-2022-DP09 and WCPFC19-2022-DP10, Niue, on behalf of FFA members, suggested that the 
Philippines submit a proposal relating to the issues in WCPFC19-2022-DP09 during the review of CMM 
2021-01 in 2023.  
Incorporating Climate Change within WCPFC (WCPFC19-2022-DP14)  
103. 
The USA submitted WCPFC19-2022-DP14, which proposed that the Commission adopt the 
following: “Recognizing the urgency of developing a comprehensive approach to understanding and 
addressing the impacts of climate change on highly migratory fish stocks in the Convention Area, and any 
related impacts on the economies of CCMs and food security and the livelihoods of their people, in 
particular SIDS and participating territories, the Commission tasks TCC and NC to include Climate Change 
as a standing agenda item and to prioritize discussion of how best to incorporate climate change information 
and analyses in their work”. 
104. 
Korea stated that climate change affects every aspect of life, including fisheries, noting that sea level 
rise and temperature increase can have a significant impact on livelihoods. Korea thanked the USA and 
supported the proposal. 
105. 
China supported the proposal. 
106. 
Tokelau on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau supported the proposal, stating it marked a step forward 
after passing a landmark climate resolution at WCPFC16. They stated that the proposal highlights that the 
climate change issue has become established in the SC agenda and proposes to strengthen consideration of 
climate change in the work of the Commission by including climate change as standing agenda items in the 
NC and TCC. They suggested that the proposal could be extended so as to include climate change as a 
standing item on the agenda of the annual Commission meetings. 
107. 
The EU strongly supported the proposal.  
108. 
Chinese Taipei stated that the issue is very important for everyone, and is affecting all countries, 
and supported the proposal. 
109. 
Indonesia supported the proposal. 
110. 
In response to Tokelau, the USA stated it would be happy to modify its proposal to include climate 
change as a standing item for the Commission as well as all subsidiary body meetings. 
111. 
The issue of climate change was further discussed under Agenda Item 8.4.1.  
Philippines letter to the Commission on VMS (WCPFC19-2022-DP16)  
112. 
The Philippines requested limited extension of the approval for its ARGOS ALC/MTU transponders 
(which expires 1 January 2023) pending a Commission decision on its proposed replacement, the VMS-
100Si.  
113. 
Japan noted that lengthy discussion on the VMS-100Si at TCC16 and TCC17, stating that its 
concerns were raised over these units because they are based on the AIS system, and signal transmission 
can be disrupted from time to time. Japan stated it was not confident at that time of their acceptability, and 
the Philippines did not submit additional information to TCC18. Japan noted that its technical staff were not 
present at WCPFC19, and requested that the Philippines provide additional information to TCC so that its 
proposal could be considered. 
25  
  
114. 
The issue was further discussed under Agenda Item 6.3.1. 
NC18 Proposal for Harvest Strategy for North Pacific Albacore (WCPFC19-2022-17) 
 
115. 
The NC Chair introduced WCPFC19-2022-17 (Attachment A) Harvest Strategy for North Pacific 
Albacore. He stated that the stock is not likely overfished and is not likely experiencing overfishing. The 
NC proposed the following:  
i) 
TRP = F45%, which is the fishing intensity (F) level that results in the stock producing 45% 
of spawning potential ratio (SPR) 
ii) 
a threshold reference point (SSBthreshold) = 30%SSBcurrent,F=0, which is 30% of the dynamic 
unfished spawning stock biomass 
iii) 
LRP =14% SSBcurrent,F=0, which is 14% of the dynamic unfished spawning stock biomass. 
The NC Chair recommended that the Commission review and hopefully adopt the proposal.  
116. 
The issue was further discussed under Agenda Item 6.5.2. 
NC18 Proposal for a CMM for North Pacific Swordfish (WCPFC19-2022-17) 
117. 
The NC Chair introduced WCPFC19-2022-17 (Attachment B) Draft Conservation and 
Management Measure for North Pacific Swordfish, and noted that there is currently no CMM for this stock, 
which is in good condition (not likely overfished and not likely experiencing overfishing). The NC 
introduced the CMM in order to maintain effort at the current level, and recommended that the Commission 
review and hopefully adopt the proposal.  
118. 
The issue was further addressed under Agenda Item 6.7.1. 
119. 
All proposals tabled for WCPFC19 consideration were introduced and proponents of 
proposals were encouraged to discuss them at the margins of the meeting and to report back their 
progress to plenary. 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 5  — SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS OF DEVELOPING STATES 
5.1 
Implementation of Article 30 of WCPFC Convention and CMM 2013-07 (SIDS special 
requirements) 
120. 
The Chair noted that paragraph 20 of CMM 2013-07 requires an annual review of implementation 
of this measure, and referenced WCPFC19-2022-IP01 Summary from Part 2 CMM 2013-07 paragraph 19 
annual reports. The report was taken as read. The Executive Director noted there was no discussion in the 
ODF. 
121. 
Tonga on behalf of FFA members thanked all CCMs that provided reports on their assistance to 
SIDS. They noted that the full recognition of the special requirements of SIDS is a cornerstone of fisheries 
governance in the region, and stated that during the negotiations of the WCPF Convention, FFA members 
noted that Article 30 is the “foundation” upon which the convention is built upon, which underscores the 
importance that FFA members attach to the full recognition of the special requirements of SIDS. They stated 
that to appreciate the significance of the agenda item to SIDS, it was only necessary to look at the map of 
26  
  
the region, which shows States with responsibility to manage fisheries over vast areas of ocean with 
associated development aspirations. FFA members noted they had introduced initiatives such as CMM 
2013-06 (the criteria to be applied when considering proposals for measures) and CMM 2013-07 
(overarching principles in support of the full recognition of our special requirements). To improve the 
implementation of CMM 2013-06 FFA members stated they have repeatedly called for accurate and 
complete assessments on the impacts of proposals that take into account the views of SIDS. They noted with 
appreciation the efforts that CCMs have taken to provide comprehensive 2013-06 assessments to accompany 
proposals to WCPFC19, while noting an assessment that is inaccurate and incomplete will not comply with 
the binding requirements in that measure. FFA members noted the significance of CMM 2013-07, which 
provides principles that also take into account provisions in the UNFSA. They invited other CCMs to take 
into account CMM 2013-07 when providing their reports. They stated that Article 30 of the Convention and 
CMM 2013-06 and 13-07 provide a robust framework for the full recognition of SIDS’ special requirements. 
They noted that it is up to SIDS to determine what their special requirements are, and to determine their 
domestic development aspirations. They continued to call on developed CCMs to provide targeted assistance 
that is aligned with SIDS’ domestic development aspirations and SIDS’ special requirements. 
122. 
The EU stated it had submitted a delegation paper (WCPFC19-2022-DP13) detailing its 
contributions, focussing on the Pacific–European Union Marine Partnership Programme, which it stated is 
the EU’s flagship program in the Pacific, implemented by FFA, SPC, SPREP, and USP. The EU stated the 
programme was being extended until April 2025. The EU invited CCMs to visit the program website and to 
engage with the implementing agencies. The EU noted that CMM 2013-06 was agreed to by all CCMs, but 
stated that implementation had proved challenging. It suggested that there is scope for clarifying the process 
to enable CCMs to understand, address, and submit proposals that meet the respective requirements.  
123. 
Japan stated that it fully recognizes the importance of the criteria in CMM 2013-06. When 
submitting a proposal, Japan stated it looks carefully at the checklist in CMM 2013-06, and will continue to 
do so. Japan stated it appreciated the opportunities to exchange views with FFA and PNA members, and 
noted that following several years of the COVID-19 pandemic, it was a great pleasure to be at WCPFC19 
in person. Japan stated it would like to maintain and enhance its close relationship with SIDS and actively 
engage in a dialogue for achieving the goal of conservation and sustainable use of the highly migratory 
species. Japan stated it has been providing SIDS with overseas development assistance for infrastructure 
and capacity building through the Japan International Cooperation Agency and the Overseas Fishery 
Cooperation Foundation (OFCF) of Japan.  During 2011–2020, Japan provided about ¥214 billion in 
development assistance, including fishery-related projects to Pacific Island countries. Fishery-related 
projects cover conservation and management of highly migratory species and assistance to small-scale 
fishermen. Also, at the Ninth Pacific Leaders Meeting held virtually in July 2021, Japan announced its 
commitment to the continuation of its robust development assistance and more than 5,500 people-to-people 
exchanges and human resource development for the next three years. Japan stated that in 2008 it established 
the Japan Trust Fund within WCPFC, which has been providing capacity building assistance to SIDS for 
improving fishery statistics and management. Japan stated that a call for proposals was sent to CCMs on 
November 18 (WCPFC Circular No 2022/88), and expressed the hope that SIDS CCMs would actively 
consider their applications by the deadline of 15 December. Japan stated it has also supported SIDS since 
2008 through the Japan Promotion Fund (JPF) via OFCF. SIDS can use the JPF for various purposes such 
as enhancement of management capacity. In November 2017, in response to the strong request from SIDS, 
OFCF signed an agreement with FFA to renew the term of the JPF for another 10 years until 2027. Also, in 
2020, OFCF increased the size of the JPF. Japan stated that it sincerely hopes that these programs and funds 
will contribute to fishery development of SIDS. 
124. 
Korea stated that it takes its obligations related to the special requirements of SIDS very seriously. 
It stated it provided information on this in its Annual Report submitted to TCC18, and noted that its national 
27  
  
budget for various overseas development assistance has been increasing. Korea stated it looks forward to 
strengthening its cooperative relationship with SIDS. 
125. 
The USA stated it is committed to building the capacity of SIDS and territories and takes seriously 
its responsibility under CMM 2013-07 to report to the Commission on these. 
126. 
WCPFC19 reaffirmed the importance of the implementation of Article 30 and CMM 
2013-07 and recognized the importance of assessing the impact of proposals on SIDS according 
to CMM 2013-06. 
5.2 
Updated Strategic Investment Plan 
127. 
The Updated Strategic Investment Plan (WCPFC19-2022-08) was posted on the WCPFC19 ODF 
(as Topic B), where no comments were received. The Chair noted that the specific purpose of the plan is to 
match capacity needs and requirements of developing states and territories with appropriate investment 
strategies. 
128. 
Fiji on behalf of FFA members thanked the Secretariat for the report. They noted and supported the 
updated Strategic Investment Plan, and stated their understanding that there may be other needs identified 
by CCMs during TCC19’s review of dCMRs when developing the Provisional CMR.  
129. 
The Commission approved the updated Strategic Investment Plan for 2022 (WCPFC19-
2022-09). (Attachment F). 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 6  — WCPO TUNA AND BILLFISH STOCKS  
6.1 
 General Overview of Status of WCPO stocks  
130. 
Dr. John Hampton (SPC) made a presentation on recent fisheries information and the status of tuna 
and billfish stocks assessed by SPC. As references he noted WCPFC19-2022-IP02_rev1 The Western and 
Central Pacific Tuna Fishery:2021 Overview and Status of Stocks and the WCPFC Tuna Fishery Yearbook 
2021. Total tuna catch for 2021 is estimated to have been 2.64 million tonnes, about average for the past 
decade. The purse seine catch in 2021 likewise was estimated to be at the average level of the past decade, 
but the provisional longline catch in 2021 is the lowest since 1991. Purse seine effort, as estimated from 
VMS data, has been stable with 2020, 2021 and 2022 (to end October) effort, very similar to the 2012-2021 
average. Longline effort, as indicated by VMS, for 2020 and 2021 was also very similar to the 2012-2021 
average, but effort in 2022 looks to be tracking at about 15% higher than in recent years. In the tropical 
longline fishery, bigeye and yellowfin catch-per-unit-effort (CPUE) has been stable if not slightly increasing 
over the past decade, after earlier declines. In the South Pacific longline fishery, albacore CPUE has declined 
steadily and continuously since the late 1990s, with the 2021 CPUE the lowest seen in the fishery for several 
decades. All four key tuna stocks (skipjack, yellowfin, bigeye and South Pacific albacore) are currently 
neither overfished nor is overfishing estimated to be occurring. However, the ratio of spawning biomass to 
the unfished level has continued to fall in the case of skipjack and South Pacific albacore, while some 
stabilisation has occurred for yellowfin and bigeye. Future projections using status quo fishing conditions 
indicate that overfishing conditions are unlikely to occur for skipjack, yellowfin and bigeye, but there is a 
small probability of the LRP being breached for South Pacific albacore in the short term because of a recent 
estimated decline in recruitment. Recent assessments of Southwest Pacific swordfish and Southwest Pacific 
striped marlin indicate that the former is not overfished and overfishing is unlikely to be occurring, but 
28  
  
Southwest Pacific striped marlin is estimated to be in an overfished state with recent fishing mortality being 
close to the maximum sustainable yield (MSY) level. Considerable uncertainty is associated with both of 
these assessments.  
131. 
Indonesia stated the presentation and associated paper were very useful in understanding the fishery 
in the WCPO, and inquired, with reference to WCPFC19-2022-IP02, page 42, which CCM was responsible 
for the substantial catch of yellowfin in the western edge of the WCPFC Convention Area. The presenter 
indicated that this catch was attributable to Vietnam. 
132. 
Japan stated that the stock status presentation indicated all species had been in a consistent decline 
since the 1970s in terms of stock status, but that the future projections indicate that status will be stable or 
improve, and asked why. Japan also requested that SPC provide the CPUE trend for longline fisheries north 
of 20°N, as done for areas 20°N to 10°S, and south of 10°S, noting that Japanese fishermen have suffered 
from poor CPUE, especially in the northern portion of the WCPFC Convention Area. SPC stated that the 
CPUE trend for the area north of 20°N could be provided, and would be posted on the meeting website. 
Regarding the perceived decline in stock status, Dr Hampton stated the projections are initially heavily 
influenced by recent recruitment, and as age classes move out then recruitment is determined by sampling 
from the historic past. He also noted that albacore is a special case, with a severe recruitment decline that 
was based on the weakest part of the data series, and not necessarily reflective of actual recruitment. 
133. 
Dr. Shui-Kai Chang, ISC Vice-Chair, provided a brief presentation on the stock status of the Pacific 
bluefin tuna and the NP swordfish. He stated that ISC has conducted an update assessment on Pacific bluefin 
tuna and two benchmark assessments on western and north Pacific Ocean (WCNPO) striped marlin and 
North Pacific Ocean (NPO) blue shark in 2022. For Pacific bluefin tuna, model structure used was the same 
as 2020 assessment, with minor changes and errors corrected and additional 2 years data inputs. No biomass-
based and fishing mortality-based reference points have been adopted for Pacific bluefin tuna. Relative to 
potential reference points adopted for other tunas, the assessment results suggested that the stock is 
overfished but overfishing is not occurring. The Pacific bluefin tuna stock is recovering faster than expected, 
and the spawning biomass reached its initial rebuilding target in 2019, 5 years earlier than originally 
anticipated by the RFMOs, and it is very likely the second rebuilding target (20%SSB0 with 60% probability) 
will be achieved (probabilities > 90%) by 2029. ISC recommended continuing monitoring of recruitment 
and spawning biomass as well as research on a recruitment index. The results of projections from sensitivity 
models with lower productivity assumptions show that this conservation information is robust to uncertainty 
in stock productivity. SC18 noted that the results of updated stock assessment, which suggest that the 
measures incorporated in CMM 2021-02 appear to be working as intended. SC18 recommended that the 
Commission exercise a precautionary approach when it considers any revisions to the current CMM 
considering that the stock is still in a depleted state, and further welcomed ISC’s effort on further 
investigation of structural uncertainty to incorporate it in future management advice. For WCNPO striped 
marlin, a benchmark assessment was planned and conducted in 2022 with several improvements to address 
data and model uncertainties, which were endorsed by the ISC Plenary (ISC22). However, ISC considers 
this modelling to be a work in progress because of a significant issue with the choice of growth curve, which 
does not fully represent stock productivity. ISC22 therefore approved a work plan to explore the growth 
curve and complete a benchmark assessment for 2023. In this regard, ISC reiterated the stock status and 
conservation information based on 2019 assessment, which show that under current conditions the stock is 
likely overfished and is likely subject to overfishing relative to MSY-based reference points. If the stock 
continues to experience recruitment consistent with the short-term recruitment scenario (2012-2016), then 
catches must be reduced to 60% of the WCPFC catch quota from CMM 2010-01 (3,397 t) to 1,359 t in order 
to achieve a 60% probability of rebuilding to 20%SSB0 by 2022. In response to a request of WCPFC18, the 
ISC concluded that reference points for WCNPO striped marlin will be provided with reference to MSY and 
with reference to 20%SSBF=0 averaged over the recent 20-year time frame (2001-2020). ISC also recognized 
uncertainty in some assessment inputs and some conflicts in the data; when developing a conservation and 
29  
  
management measure to rebuild the resource, it is recommended that these issues be recognized and 
carefully considered. The SC18 concurred with the ISC22 that the assessment is a work in progress and 
looks forward to the ISC billfish working group (BILLWG) workplan to explore the growth curve and 
complete a benchmark assessment for approval at ISC23. SC18 agreed that the conservation and 
management advice for WCNPO striped marlin will be carried forward from 2019. 
134. 
The EU noted that the WCNPO striped marlin stock assessment had been deferred to 2023. The EU 
stated that this had happened for several years, which impacts the ability to take action on this stock. The 
EU noted that the data conflicts and data gaps issues had been flagged for several years, and asked whether 
these had been indeed overcome. The presenter stated that the benchmark assessment could not be 
completed because of issues regarding the choice of the growth curve. He noted that the benchmark 
assessment could likely be completed next year. Japan stated that the BILLWG is currently holding a 
meeting in Japan, and the specific issue of the choice of the growth curve was being discussed at that 
meeting. Japan noted that ISC was well aware of the need to provide results, and fully expected that it would 
provide an updated assessment in 2023. 

135. 
WCPFC19 noted with appreciation the presentations by the Scientific Services Provider 
and the ISC on the status of WCPFC tuna and billfish stocks. 
30   
6.2 
Skipjack, Bigeye and Yellowfin 
136. 
The Chair introduced this agenda by highlighting three issues: harvest strategy-related issues, 
including the MP for skipjack; TRPs for the three species; and a review of the current TTM. She stated that 
the meeting would also consider a process for negotiation of a new or revised TTM in 2023. She noted the 
following document prepared by the Secretariat: WCPFC19-2022-09 Reference document for bigeye, 
yellowfin and skipjack tuna for the review of CMM 2021-01 and development of harvest strategies under 
CMM 2014-06. 
6.2.1 
Harvest Strategy Issues 
6.2.1.1 Update on review of target reference point for skipjack  

137. 
Dr. Graham Pilling (SPC-OFP) gave a brief presentation to provide context to the consideration of 
a TRP for skipjack, with reference to WCPFC19-2022-10 Evaluations to support decisions on the WCPO 
skipjack tuna target reference point based upon the 2022 stock assessment. This provides the results of 
SC18-requested analyses to update SC18-MI-WP-09 (Table 2) to include evaluations based on the 2022 
skipjack assessment using the same settings as in that paper and include the projected outcomes for a set of 
candidate TRP options ranging between 40% to 60% depletion ratios (SB/SBF=0). The baseline future fishing 
levels were namely: i) 2012 effort level for purse seine fisheries (SC18 request); ii) 2001-2004 average effort 
level for pole and line fisheries (SMD01 request); and iii) 2016-2018 average catch level for small scale 
fisheries in Region 5 of the model (Indonesia, Philippines, Vietnam. Assumption consistent with SC18-MI-
WP-09). To achieve candidate depletion levels, the future purse seine effort levels only were raised or 
lowered. Under ‘baseline’ fishing levels the WCPO skipjack stock is predicted, on average, to fall very 
slightly compared to ‘recent’ levels (being the 2018-2021 average spawning biomass depletion = 
51%SBF=0), to 50%SBF=0. This is 17% below 2012 depletion levels (61%SBF=0). Examining the ten other 
median depletion levels requested by SC18: i) depletion levels of 40% to 48%SBF=0 imply increases in purse 
seine effort from 2012 levels by 10% to 52% and imply declines of 6 to 21% in spawning biomass depletion 
compared to recent assessed levels; ii) depletion levels of 52% to 60%SBF=0 imply decreases in purse seine 
effort from 2012 levels by 10% to 40% and imply increases in spawning biomass depletion compared to 
recent assessed levels. 

  
138. 
Vanuatu, on behalf of FFA members, thanked SPC for updating Table 2 in SC18-2022-WP09 to 
include evaluations based on the new 2022 skipjack tuna assessment. They noted that the table was very 
helpful in informing the review of the TRP for skipjack tuna and should be the cornerstone for discussions 
on this topic. They stated that the results of the updated analysis show that the two values being used to 
calculate the TRP in the interim MP for skipjack tuna proposed by FFA members in WCPFC19-2022-DP04 
would result in no change in purse seine effort from 2012 levels and only a minor (-2%) change in spawning 
biomass depletion from recent 2018-2021 levels. They also noted that this TRP is consistent with the 
previous interim TRP agreed to at WCPFC12. It has zero risk of breaching the LRP, and includes an updated 
stock-related element, which takes into account the effects of increases in reported skipjack tuna catches in 
Indonesia and the Philippines, changes to the TTM in 2017, and changes in the skipjack assessment model. 
They stated that it will also be the most precautionary TRP for any major tropical tuna stock in the world. 
FFA members stated that for these reasons they are confident that the adoption of this TRP and the interim 
MP for skipjack tuna proposed in WCPFC19-2022-DP04 would go a long way to ensuring that the 
biological, economic and social objectives of this critically important stock are achieved. 
139. 
The EU inquired regarding the implications of the fact that the average baseline 2001-2004 pole 
and line effort levels are 159% greater than in 2021. SPC stated if the projection assumes that effort will be 
equal to the 2001-2004 level, while actual effort is less, this suggests the stock will be less depleted than the 
projections indicate. The EU inquired how precautionary this is, is it significant? SPC stated that if 2021 
levels were run into future it would get to about 55% of unfished levels.  
140. 
Japan stated that in the 2019 stock assessment the depletion level in 2012 was 42%, and the 2016–
2018 depletion level was also around 42%, suggesting it could be used as a baseline. The current stock 
assessment indicates a depletion level in 2012 of around 61%, with 2018-2021 depletion of about 50%. 
Japan noted that this suggests a different situation and trend, and inquired why these changes occurred 
between the 2019 and 2022 stock assessments, and which stock assessment SPC considered more 
trustworthy? Japan noted that references were now made to both, and stated that the proposed harvest 
strategy or MP all are based on the 2019 stock assessment.  
141. 
SPC stated that significant changes were made between the 2019 and 2022 stock assessments, and 
that SPC considers the 2022 stock assessment to be an improvement over the 2019 stock assessment; the 
2022 assessment shows a pattern of decline that was not apparent in the 2019 assessment. SPC stated that 
the 2022 stock assessment includes a purse seine index of abundance, which may have contributed to the 
depletion trend in that stock assessment. SPC stated that it was necessary to separate the full stock 
assessment from the work that underpins harvest strategy, which are different. The stock assessment used 
in the harvest strategy looks at the past, while the stock assessment models seek to capture future 
uncertainties, with other models on effort creep and recruitment uncertainty included in the projections. 
Therefore the 2022 stock assessment is considered the best available science in terms of assessing overall 
stock status, while the 2019 models are used for a different purpose in the harvest strategy work. 
142. 
Tuvalu on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau thanked SPC for the table of recalibrated candidate TRPs 
and related explanation based on the 2022 assessment, and stated it was what they requested at WCPFC18, 
SC18 and SMD01. They noted the significant changes in the table, and stated their understanding that these 
results from changes in the skipjack fisheries and the science, and stated that these were broadly in the 
direction that PNA expected when they requested the table; in particular they were concerned about the 
effects on the potential TRP of increases in skipjack catches since the previous assessment. These changes 
include the increased catches in archipelagic waters of some developing coastal states, the effects of the 
changes to the TTM in 2017, and the effect of overfishing of high seas purse seine effort limits in recent 
years. They noted that the changes would require a large reduction in purse seine effort with associated 
economic costs. The overall result indicates that it is no longer reasonable to base the TRP, wholly or 
partially, on maintaining 2012 stock conditions. They stated that the fishery has moved on and consideration 
31  
  
of a TRP has to take into account the changes that have occurred. Given that the stock is assessed as one of 
the healthiest tropical tuna stocks, they stated that in their view it makes no sense to be considering large 
cuts in purse seine effort in response to the changes that have occurred, stating that would be unfair to the 
SIDS in whose waters purse seining largely takes place, and those involved in the operations of the purse 
seine fishery. On that basis, PNA and Tokelau, with their FFA colleagues, stated they had proposed an 
updated TRP in the draft skipjack management procedure. It is based on maintaining 2012 purse seine effort 
and recent stock conditions in 2018-2021. This would maintain a TRP of 50% spawning biomass depletion 
ratio using the 2022 assessment results. This approach would preserve the existing fishing opportunities for 
the purse seine fishery, and recent stock conditions for all involved in the skipjack fisheries, while taking 
account of the changes in the fishery that have already occurred. They stated it is consistent with the 
approach previously used to determine the interim skipjack TRP; avoids potential additional impacts on 
other fisheries for skipjack, including artisanal fisheries; and should generally avoid potential additional 
impacts on other target stocks and non-target species. In addition, it will be the most precautionary TRP of 
any major tropical tuna stock globally. They stated that they looked forward to positive discussions on this 
proposed TRP. 
143. 
Japan, in response to the preceding interventions by other CCMs, stated its understanding that the 
current operating procedures and estimation models are based on 2019 stock assessment, which estimated 
42% depletion level in 2012 which was a candidate TRP proposed by PNA, and observed that if the 
Commission continues to use this model, then recent depletion may be roughly equal to 2012 levels, 
meaning fishing effort may need not to be reduced. However, Japan stated that according to the results of 
the 2022 stock assessment, recent depletion is far lower than 2012 level and there may be a need to reduce 
effort in some fisheries. Japan stated that SC agreed on use of the 2019 stock assessment, and asked if that 
means the estimation model would continue to be based on 2019 model for 3 years?  
144. 
SPC stated that the role of the TRP in the harvest strategy is to provide an indicator of performance 
to indicate whether the harvest strategy will keep the stock around a given level into the future. The approach 
suggested by FFA would recalculate values in the harvest strategy, but this would not change the HCR or 
the estimation method.  
145. 
WCPFC19 noted with appreciation the presentation by the Scientific Services Provider 
on the target reference point for skipjack tuna. 
6.2.1.2 Review of additional work tasked by the SMD01 and adoption of 
management procedures for skipjack tuna.  
 
146. 
Dr. Rob Scott (SPC-OFP) presented WCPFC19-2022-11A_rev 1 (Updates to management 
procedure evaluations for WCPO skipjack and PIMPLE since SMD01), which briefly summarises the 
discussions of the SMD01 and presented the results of additional analyses requested at both SC18 and 
SMD01 to progress the development of a harvest strategy for WCPO skipjack. The requested work included 
the evaluation of HCRs 6 and 9, including a 10% constraint on changes in catch and effort levels similar to 
that previously applied to HCRs 1, 2 and 5; the revision of baseline catch and effort levels assumed for the 
evaluations (purse seine 2012 effort, pole and line 2001-04 effort, and the domestic fisheries in assessment 
region 5 on 2016-18 catch); and the evaluation of additional ‘robustness’ scenarios to investigate the 
performance of candidate MPs under persistent low recruitment in the future. In addition, the SMD01 
requested further information on which fisheries would be exempt from the control of the management 
procedure and requested that a number of revisions be made to the PIMPLE software that was developed to 
allow members to interrogate the results of the evaluations and to assist in the process of selecting a preferred 
MP. The results of all of the requested analyses are presented in WCPFC19-2022-11A_rev 1 and specific 
information on the performance of the five candidate management procedures is available on the interactive 
32  
  
online app https://ofp-sam.shinyapps.io/PIMPLE_WCPFC19/. The presentation also noted that a ‘dry run’ 
analysis had been conducted (WCPFC19-2022-11B) to illustrate the hypothetical implementation of a 
skipjack management procedure in 2022 using data up to 2021. It was noted that, if an MP was adopted at 
WCPFC19, this process would be repeated, using updated data, in 2023.  
147. 
PNG on behalf of FFA members thanked SPC for undertaking the additional work tasked by the 
SMD01 to help the Commission make informed decisions on adoption of an MP for skipjack, noting it had 
informed development of the interim MP for skipjack proposed by FFA members in WCPFC19-2022-
DP04. They noted with interest that all five MPs retained by the SMD01 result in the spawning depletion 
ratio being slightly above the target in the short to medium-term and at, or very close to, the target in the 
long-term. They stated that all five MPs also perform well in terms of stock sustainability and maintaining 
the fishery’s overall stability, but HCR 9 which drives FFA’s proposed interim MP is the most effective at 
maintaining effort around the baseline in the short term. They stated they consider this a desirable 
characteristic because it preserves the existing fishing opportunities for the purse seine fishery, and is one 
reasons FFA members chose HCR 9. They stated there are other reasons for their choice of HCR 9, but 
invited initial responses from CCMs on the proposed interim MP, noting their intent to have it implemented 
from 2023. 
148. 
Indonesia inquired, regarding Table 5, whether the handline catch in 2021 was 0 (no catch), and if 
so why it was included. Regarding the HCR, Indonesia stated that No. 2 and No. 9 appeared quite similar in 
terms of outcome. It inquired if there were factors restricting the choice of HCR. SPC stated it would be 
problematic to adopt more than one HCR, and that SPC proposed to have a single HCR. SPC noted the 
performance of the HCRs (2 and 9) is quite similar, with differences in the performance indicators. 
149. 
Tuvalu on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau thanked FFA members for introducing the proposal, and 
thanked those who contributed to the discussions on harvest strategies and on a skipjack MP in particular. 
They noted that the proposal draws heavily on the discussion and outcomes from SC and the recent SMD01, 
and that it had been greatly helped by the various capacity building exercises supported by the Commission, 
offering their thanks in particular the staff involved at SPC, led by Dr Graham Pilling, and Dr Rob Campbell, 
convenor of the Management Issues theme at SC. The PNA and Tokelau also thanked the Chair, for her 
support of the Commission’s Harvest Strategy work, including as co-Chair of SMD01 along with the SC 
Chair. They stated that the proposal was prepared in the spirit of what PNA and Tokelau understand is the 
essence of the Harvest Strategy approach, the aim of which is to improve decision-making by having pre-
agreed rules for how fishing will be adjusted as the status of stocks changes, and taking better account of 
uncertainty. In that direction, they specifically tried to develop an interim MP based on the status quo, that 
does not advantage or disadvantage any CCMs or sector. They stated their hope other CCMs would find this 
proposal useful and looked forward to their consideration of it. 
150. 
CCMs undertook further discussions of the skipjack MP in the SWG.   
151. 
The Chair of the SWG, Ms Berry Muller (RMI), subsequently advised on 3 December that 
consensus had been reached on the draft CMM on a Management Procedure for Skipjack Tuna.   
152. 
WCPFC19 adopted CMM 2022-01 Conservation and Management Measure on a 
Management Procedure for WCPO Skipjack Tuna. (Attachment G) 
6.2.1.3 Agree on the target reference point for bigeye and yellowfin 
153. 
Dr. Steven Hare (SPC-OFP) presented WCPFC19-2022-12 WCPO bigeye and yellowfin TRP 
evaluations (with updated 2022 skipjack assessment results), which provides the results of SC18-requested 
33  
  
analyses to update SC17-MI-WP-01 to include multispecies implications, and updates results based on the 
2022 skipjack assessment. The report presents the consequences for each stock and fishery of SC16-defined 
stock depletion levels (SB/SBF=0) consistent with specified historical conditions and stock risk levels 
(paragraphs 76-78 of the SC16 Outcomes Document). Projections were conducted under two recruitment 
alternatives for bigeye; one based on the “recent” stock-recruitment relationship (last 10 years) and one on 
long-term recruitment (over entire assessment).  Yellowfin projections were all based on long-term 
recruitment. Under baseline (2016-2018 average) fishing conditions, both bigeye (both recruitment 
alternatives) and yellowfin stocks were projected to increase relative to 2012-2015 average levels, and either 
remain at recent (2015-2018 average) levels (yellowfin) or increase (bigeye). Six SC-requested scenarios 
were considered for all three sets of projections; three were based on achieving a depletion level in 2048 
equal to the 2012-2015 average (equal to and +/- 10% depletion). One scenario was to achieve 2048 
depletion equal to the 2000-2004 average. Final SC16-specified depletion levels related to those equivalent 
to a 10% and 20% risk of falling below the LRP. Results for all three sets of projections are provided in 
tables in the report. Results provided included namely i) Change in SB/SBF=0 from 2012-2015 and recent 
(2015-2018) averages; ii) Risk = percentage of projections where SB/SBF=0 < LRP; iii) Multispecies impact 
(Equivalent depletion for other species, i.e., skipjack + bigeye/yellowfin + albacore); iv) Median equilibrium 
yield (% of MSY); and v) Relative YPR and SPR (to base fishing level). Equivalent depletion levels for 
South Pacific albacore were 5-10 percentage points below 2012-2015 average across all scenarios; 
equivalent skipjack depletion could be higher, lower, or equal to 2012-2015 depletion depending on 
scenario. 
154. 
Australia on behalf of FFA members noted that the depletion levels for skipjack tuna have recently 
been updated at each of the specified TRPs for yellowfin and bigeye tuna following the adoption of the new 
2022 skipjack assessment, yet SC18 was unable to provide further advice or recommendations to the 
Commission on TRPs for these two important tuna stocks.  The decision on TRPs for these stocks is critical 
and has major implications for the management of our fisheries. They stated that yellowfin and bigeye tuna 
are central stocks for FFA members, important in both purse seine and longline fisheries, and having a clear 
understanding of the trade-offs associated with potential TRPs is essential. Given that more time will be 
needed for the Commission to come to an agreement on TRPs for both yellowfin and bigeye tuna, FFA 
members recommended rescheduling the selection of TRPs for these two stocks, perhaps to 2024, while the 
Commission continues to develop the multi-species modelling framework and other work such as the 
consideration of candidate MPs for the tropical longline fisheries.  FFA members reiterated their 
commitment to progressing harvest strategy work and stated they look forward to progressing the 
discussions on developing suitable TRPs for yellowfin and bigeye. 
155. 
The Chair noted the lack of agreement on the setting of TRP, asked stated that this should be taken 
into account when updating the workplan (addressed under Agenda Item 7.1). 
156. 
WCPFC19 noted the report from the Scientific Services Provider on a target reference 
point for bigeye and yellowfin tuna (WCPFC19-2022-12).  WCPFC19 agreed on the need for 
further work prior to considering target reference points for bigeye and yellowfin tuna and noted 
that the Commission will continue to work on these issues in the coming years.  
 
6.3 
Review of CMM 2021-01 
6.3.1 
Evaluation and review of CMM 2021-01  
157. 
The Chair noted that the relevant reference papers for this agenda item are working papers 
WCPFC19-2022-09 Reference Document for Bigeye, Yellowfin and Skipjack tuna for the Review of CMM 
34  
  
2021-01 and Development of Harvest Strategies under CMM 2014-06 and WCPFC19-2022-13_rev1 
Evaluation of CMM 2021-01  
158. 
Dr. Paul Hamer (SPC-OFP) presented on the evaluation of CMM 2021-01 with reference to 
WCPFC19-2022-13_rev1. The presentation provided a brief background on the purpose and scope of the 
CMM 2021-01, the evaluation of which is required each year while it is in operation. This was followed by 
a description of the approach to conducting the evaluation, the main results and summary of the implications. 
The main updates to the evaluation were that results from new stock projections for skipjack using the 2022 
assessment were included, and the latest data for year 2021 were added to Table 9 on the observed FAD set 
and longline catch scalars and the various tables in the appendices. The recent observed scalars for FAD 
sets and longline catches where less than the scalars predicted under the CMM based on the 2016-18 baseline 
period. The evaluation indicated that the CMM provisions, notably the FAD closures and longline catch 
limits, were consistent with meeting the interim stock status objectives noted in paras 11-13. It was noted 
that new stock assessments for yellowfin and bigeye will be conducted in 2023, and that CMM 2021-01 will 
expire in February 2024.  
159. 
The EU posed four questions: (i) Purse seine effort and longline catch are expressed as scalars of 
the levels reported in 2016–2018. What is the rationale for not using real 2019–2021 information for this 
simulation instead of trying to predict what the fleet would have done relative to 2016-2018 conditions? The 
EU stated that it made sense when evaluating the measure some years ago, but now it is not clear. SPC stated 
that the provisions of the CMM came into effect in 2019; the scalars are relative to conditions that were in 
place prior to that. (ii) The EU stated that it did not understand the following comment in the last paragraph 
in section 5, and asked SPC to explain: “We also assume that the potential increase in purse seine fishing 
effort permissible under recently nominated EEZ effort levels will not occur, under the logic that we do not 
expect EEZs where purse seine effort has been less than 1500 days annually over recent years to attract 
additional effort”. SPC stated that as the EU implied, there is scope for effort to increase, and that one 
scenario that could be run would be with effort at maximum level for all limits. (iii) The EU stated that in 
Attachment 2 of CMM 2021-01, there is a limit of 2,282 days in the high seas (for CCMs with limits, 
excluding the Philippines), and the sum of days that actually took place in 2021 for limited CCMs shown in 
Table 13 is of 1,147 days. However, according to Table 14, row 10, it seems the number of sets reported in 
2021 is higher than in both the optimistic and pessimistic scenarios. The EU inquired whether that 
interpretation was correct? If so, how is that? The number of fishing days was half that predicted in the 
pessimistic scenario but the number of sets was significantly higher; is there an issue in reporting or has 
setting frequency increased? In reply SPC stated that the scalar of 1.06 is for the entire fishery. The high sea 
component is a very small component of the FAD sets, and changes in the days in the HS has very little 
effect.  (iv) Regarding the bottom row in Table 14 (the impact of removing the FAD sets from non-limited 
CCMs in the high seas), the EU stated its understanding that this estimation is based on 2016-2018 
conditions, and inquired if this was correct, noting that if so, it would like to know how it compares with the 
real 2019-2021 data. SPC stated that recent rates (2019-2021) are used for the calculations.  
160. 
Japan observed that WCPFC adopted the first tropical tuna CMM in 2008, with a series of 
subsequent renewals and modifications, and that SPC has provided multiple projections over this period, all 
of which show a declining stock status trend for bigeye, yellowfin, and skipjack, despite the series of TTMs 
that have been in place. Japan suggested one reason may be because the evaluations do not take effort creep 
of purse seine or other fisheries into account, and stated that its delegation had urged many times that effort 
creep be included. Japan stated its understanding that effort creep is not included in the projections discussed 
at WCPFC19. Japan stated that it is known that effort creep has occurred over time, and suggested that it 
could possibly be estimated based on past effort creep. Japan also suggested that possible factors other than 
effort creep could also be considered. SPC agreed that effort creep is a topic of interest, and stated it was 
addressed in the recent skipjack stock assessment. SPC stated that it lacks good estimates of effort creep to 
project into the future, and prefers to run effort creep scenarios on a strong information base. SPC stated it 
35  
  
has some measures planned to estimate effort creep, which would be discussed in SC. SPC stated that more 
work on this is needed, and emphasized it is reluctant to suggest that reliable of estimates of effort creep 
could be made based on existing data. 
161. 
Cook Islands on behalf of FFA members thanked SPC for the ongoing and very useful analysis, 
stating it provides a clear update on the performance of the management actions in achieving the objectives 
set out for the current TTM in paragraphs 11-13, which are adequately achieving the management objective. 
They stated this would be very useful in preparations for the review of the TTM in 2023. They stated that 
while the CMM is adequately achieving its management objectives from a technical perspective, FFA 
members find that the distribution of benefits accrued from these fisheries are still very uneven. They stated 
that the coastal states who are stewards to most of the resources remain very dependent on these fisheries 
for economic growth and food security, but see the benefits skewed towards those outside the region, and 
seek a more equitable distribution the benefits, economically and socially in the near future. 
162. 
New Zealand stated it supported the work by SPC to further examine the effort creep dynamics, and 
referenced its comments at SC18 that focussed on some concerns on model data conflicts, which included 
the concern that effort creep had not been taken into account adequately. New Zealand encouraged further 
work on this. 
163. 
RMI stated that in looking at a new TTM it was important to recognize the objectives of the current 
TTM are largely working. RMI supported the comments by Cook Islands. RMI also noted the need to 
support CCMs’ development aspirations.  
164. 
Indonesia thanked SPC for the work and presentation, and stated that while the indication is that 
CMM 2021-01 would likely achieve its objectives as applied to the entire WCPFC Convention Area the 
situation in Region 5 situation was quite different, and asked whether there was any specific information 
regarding the likelihood of achieving the interim objectives in Region 5. SPC stated that the evaluations are 
structured around the objective of the CMM, which addresses the entire stock. An evaluation at a subregional 
scale requires determining how to structure the analysis. SPC noted that there are no objectives at the 
subregional scale, and stated if subregional evaluations were desired, it would have to consider how to do 
this. 
165. 
Kiribati directed the Commission's attention to SC18-MI-IP-02, which examined effort creep in the 
purse seine fishery and found very little evidence of it based on the currently available data. 
166. 
Nauru, on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau, noted that the update on the performance of the TTM 
shows that the measure is projected to continue to achieve its objectives, and stated that thanks to the TTM, 
tropical tuna stocks are healthy, and the major tropical fisheries are stable. They noted that the next step, as 
CCMs had agreed, is to put in place longer-term arrangements in the form of harvest strategies. They stated 
they look forward to the Commission taking a major step forward at this session by adopting a skipjack MP. 
However, they noted gaps and weaknesses in the current management framework, especially for 
management of fishing in the high seas, which is less well controlled and far less effectively monitored than 
fishing in national waters, and stated it would be difficult to fully apply longer-term management 
arrangements until the weakness in high seas management is addressed. 
167. 
China stated its understanding that skipjack is more productive than other tuna and more sensitive 
to environmental impacts, as reflected in the stock assessments. China inquired whether the evaluation 
considers climate change, especially as relates to recruitment? SPC stated that the evaluations do not 
consider climate change or recruitment relationships; they reflect the status quo or long-term recruitment. 
36  
  
168. 
WCPFC19 noted with appreciation the report from the Scientific Services Provider on 
the evaluation and review of CMM 2021-01 (WCPFC19-2022-13_rev1). 
 
Philippines letter to the Commission on VMS (WCPFC19-2022-DP16) 
169. 
The Philippines reviewed the issues raised in its delegation paper WCPFC19-2022-DP16 as 
introduced under Agenda Item 4.  
170. 
During the ensuing discussion CCMs supported a 1-year extension of the replacement period for 
the ARGOS units, but stressed to the Philippines that it should ensure it either obtained Commission 
approval for the VMS 100Si or another unit prior to the expiration of the 1-year extension, as it would not 
be renewed.  
171. 
WCPFC19 agreed to the request from the Philippines for a limited extension of no longer 
than 12 months for the replacement of ARGOS units covering only the support vessels that are 
operating in High Seas Pocket 1.  WCPFC19 indicated that no further extension would be agreed, 
and that Philippines needed to address the type approval of VMS 100Si. 
 
6.3.1.1 Review of results from the FAD Management Options IWG 
172. 
The Chair stated that the Commission would consider the aspects of the report of the FAD 
Management Options Intersessional Working Group (FADMO-IWG) that relate to the FAD provisions of 
CMM 2021-01. 
173. 
The FADMO-IWG Chair, Jamel James (FSM) summarised the work of the IWG, referencing 
WCPFC19-2022-FADMgmtOptions Progress report of the FADMO-IWG on the preliminary review of 
available information on biodegradable FADS. 
174. 
French Polynesia acknowledged and supported the important and necessary work on biodegradable 
FADs, but emphasised the need for effort by WCPFC and IATTC to strengthen effective management of 
FADs, including by addressing FAD monitoring, identification, and tracking, and appropriate limits on the 
number of FADs. French Polynesia also asked that WCPFC and IATTC work together to stop the stranding 
of FADs on French Polynesia’s shores, stating it was time to address these issues. 
175. 
Tuvalu on behalf of FFA members acknowledged and thanked the FADMO-IWG Chair and 
participants for their work to date on addressing the issues of improving FAD development and management 
in the WCPO. FFA members reiterated their commitment to the work of the IWG and supported SC18’s 
recommendation that FADMO-IWG continue its work on assessing the best options for the use of 
“biodegradable FADs”. They noted that it is important to have a clear definition of “biodegradable FADs”, 
and a timeline and steps for their introduction FADs. They encouraged constructive engagements by CCMs 
in the IWG. FFA members also supported TCC18’s recommendation on revising the specifications in 
paragraph 17 of CMM 2021-01 to prohibit deploying FADs with mesh net after 1 January 2024. They noted 
the need to revisit the ROP minimum data fields related to the monitoring of non-entangling and 
biodegradable FAD implementation in the future, to improve related data quality, and stated their 
understanding that these would also be included in the work of the FADMO-IWG in 2023.  
37  
  
176. 
  New Caledonia stated that FADs are tools used by purse seine fisheries, but that they should not 
become waste. New Caledonia stated that its EEZ contains remote reefs and islands that are highly protected, 
with thousands of seabirds, some of which are also protected. Abandoned FADs are found on these fully 
protected beaches, along with numerous buoys with batteries and electrical components. New Caledonia 
stated that this constitutes a type of pollution, and encouraged work to address both abandoned FADs and 
the issue of buoys. 
177. 
Korea thanked the FADMO IWG for its work. It noted that IATTC and WCPFC are neighbouring 
RFMOs, and stated that it is important to ensure that CMMs adopted in those RFMOs are consistent and 
harmonised for vessels fishing in both convention areas. It supported the proposed use of the IATTC 
definition of biodegradable FADs, and supported the IWG recommendation. 
178. 
The EU stated its understanding that COVID-19 did not allow the work of the FADMO-IWG to 
take place as expected, and expressed the hope that the pace of work could be accelerated. The EU noted 
that much scientific work was ongoing, and wanted to ensure that it was more thoroughly discussed at TCC 
and SC, and that the FADMO-IWG resume work in a more active manner in 2023. The EU stated it 
supported the proposed recommendation, but questioned whether this would take place at WCPFC19, or be 
delayed another year by being referred to the IWG. The Chair stated that this depended on how CCMs 
wished to proceed.  
179. 
The USA thanked participants for continuing to progress work on FADs through the IWG, 
supported the recommendations made by SC and TCC, and Korea’s statement concerning the need for 
compatible FAD definitions between IATTC and WCPFC. 
180. 
French Polynesia supported the comment by the EU. 
 
 
181. 
WCPFC19 noted with appreciation the report of the Chair of the FAD Management 
Options IWG (WCPFC19-2022-FADMgmtOptions).  
182. 
The Commission supported the SC18 and TCC18 recommendations for the IATTC 
definition of biodegradable and categories of biodegradable FADs. The Commission further 
noted that the FADMO-IWG will further examine the categories of biodegradable FADs, 
timeline for the stepwise introduction of biodegradable FADs, potential gaps and other relevant 
information.  
183. 
The Commission tasked the FADMO-IWG with assistance from the Secretariat and the 
Scientific Services Provider to review the effectiveness of paragraph 22 of CMM 2021-01 and 
other FAD related issues and incorporate into its 2023 work plan. 
 
6.3.1.2 Baseline period or limit of the Indonesian Large Fish Handline Fishery 
 
184. 
The Chair noted that WCPFC19 would consider the advice of SC18 and TCC18, and the information 
submitted by Indonesia, on the baseline period or limit for the Indonesian large fish handline fishery.  
185. 
Indonesia introduced WCPFC19-2022-DP11 Options for a baseline of the "Large-fish" Handline 
Fishery fishing in Indonesia's EEZ (IEEZ) with vessels >30GT for the WCPFC Tropical Tuna Measure. It 
noted that the issue was previously considered by SC17 and SC18, and TCC17 and TCC18. SC18 noted the 
information provided by Indonesia related to options for a baseline of the “large- fish” handline fishery 
38  
  
fishing in Indonesia’s EEZ, and observed that the decision on the fishery’s baseline is a policy decision, and 
that it did not believe it appropriate to provide any recommendations on a baseline, but recommended the 
Commission consider the information provided in the relevant SC18 papers and the comments in the SC18 
ODF on the topic in its decision making. TCC18 observed that the decision on the baseline period should 
be made by the Commission, and invited Indonesia to provide additional information to WCPFC19, which 
Indonesia stated it had sought to do in WCPFC19-2022-DP11.    
186. 
The USA stated it appreciated submission of WCPFC19-2022-DP11 by Indonesia and that it 
understood the data challenges Indonesia faces. It noted that catch estimates were provided during 2013-
2016, but that a transition to a new data collection system had subsequently prevented data submissions. 
The USA inquired whether Indonesia would provide additional data in the future? 
187. 
Fiji on behalf of FFA members noted that this was not the first time the Commission had discussed 
this proposal and stated FFA members had raised concerns before. They inquired: i) Why is the proposal 
limit based on the ‘highest catch’ (2015 catches) within the proposed period of 2013-2016 which does not 
take into consideration that there is a need to limit the expansion of effort and catches from this fishery, 
given the lack of proper monitoring and reporting?; and ii) What is the status of recent catches, from 2017 
to 2021, for this fishery?. FFA members noted their concern with the large limit proposed and the inference 
that a CCM can simply pick the highest catch estimated as a limit without making efforts to constrain the 
fishery in the way other CCMs must do. 
188. 
Japan stated that during discussion at TCC meetings on this issue many information gaps had been 
noted, and sought clarification regarding data availability. Japan also stated it had concerns because 
Indonesia was seeking to set its catch limit based on a single year, while other members are managed based 
on an average of 2001-2004. Japan stated it was unfair to other CCMs if Indonesia choose one good year as 
a reference year. Japan also addressed the lack of catch data for years other than 2013-2016, and stated its 
interest in seeing recent catch data for the handline fishery, noting the importance of having accurate data 
on which to make a decision on a baseline. It noted that paragraph 11 of WCPFC19-2022-DP11 states that 
prior to 2004 several companies conducted large fish handlining, and suggested that if it was correct, perhaps 
some accurate data should be obtainable from those several companies.  
189. 
China inquired if Indonesia could provide catch by species, rather than grouped. 
190. 
Tokelau on behalf of PNA and Tokelau noted that apart from the discussion on the level of this 
limit, there is the issue of how a skipjack MP will be applied to this fishery.  The current limit is an aggregate 
limit of bigeye, skipjack and yellowfin catches. The limits on other commercial fisheries are similar. They 
noted that some work will clearly be needed on how the skipjack MP outputs will be applied to these 
fisheries.  
191. 
The Chair encouraged Indonesia to consider CCMs’ comments when providing additional data.  
192. 
WCPFC19 noted the delegation paper submitted by Indonesia and the Scientific Services 
Provider on the Indonesian large fish handline fishery (WCPFC19-2022-DP11).  There was no 
agreement to adopt the recommendation in the paper and WCPFC19 noted that it would 
appreciate receiving further information from Indonesia in response to questions raised at 
WCPFC19. 
 
39  
  
6.3.1.3 Process to negotiate a new or revised Tropical Tuna Measure 
193. 
The Chair stated that there was a need for the Commission to determine a process to negotiate a 
new or revised TTM, as the current CMM expires on 15 February 2024. She stated that previous TTM 
negotiations had involved special several meetings: in 2021, there were two workshops chaired by the 
Commission Chair to discuss the revised measure (the current CMM 2021-01); in 2017, there were two 
intersessional sessions of the WCPFC to progress negotiations on a new TTM.  
194. 
Niue on behalf of FFA members stated that in WCPFC19-2022-DP03 (introduced under Agenda 
Item 4), FFA members sought WCPFC’s commitment to a more focused process to work on the TTM in 
2023 that prioritizes the issue of an overarching hard limit for purse seine effort on the high seas and a 
framework for the allocation of that limit. FFA members stressed that the TTM provides the critical 
implementing framework for the skipjack MP. Establishing an overall limit for high seas purse seine effort 
is critical to ensure the effective implementation of the MP and FFA members stated they see this as the 
most critical issue for resolution in 2023. Agreement of an allocation framework would also eliminate the 
need to rely on an exemption to protect the rights and interests of SIDS and territories to participate in the 
high seas purse seine fishery.   
195. 
The USA stated it was open to a discussion on the best approach to developing the TTM, and that 
it would prefer a complete discussion that covers all components, including purse seine and longline, and 
suggested the need for a workplan. 
196. 
RMI stated that the TTM largely achieved the desired objectives and outcome; while some 
adjustments might be needed, it suggested using the current TTM as a basis, as it largely works for all 
CCMs. Issues to address could then be identified. RMI stressed the need for early communication, and noted 
without it the discussion in 2023 would be very difficult. RMI also stressed the importance of CMM 2013-
06 in that respect. It stated it looked forward to a new CMM that largely captures the elements of the current 
TTM and adjusts as needed in a way that is acceptable to all. 
197. 
Chinese Taipei stated that there are many elements to be addressed, and supported a focus on all 
elements. It supported the comment made by the USA, as well as that by RMI, and noted the need to 
rebalance the components in the CMM.  
198. 
The EU stated that the CMM will expire, so all elements of it needed to be discussed. It referenced 
linkages between the approach to the WCPFC19 discussions on an MP for skipjack and the approach to 
drafting and adopting a TTM. It suggested that it might be necessary to wait until the discussion of the 
skipjack MP had progressed before discussing how to address the TTM in 2023.  
199. 
The Chair stated that the mandates in CMM 2021-01 are clear. She agreed that there are links 
between a skipjack MP (which she stated she hoped would be agreed to at WCPFC19) and the TTM to be 
agreed to in 2023, and stated she wanted to focus on the process for adopting a TTM, not the details of the 
content. 
200. 
Japan noted the opinions expressed by the USA and Chinese Taipei, and reflected that in the past 
discussions on the issue had carefully considered the balance between regions and fisheries (longline and 
purse seine), and suggested this would be a good approach to use. 
201. 
Korea stated that the Commission previously used workshops dedicated to discussion of the TTM, 
and suggested a similar approach be used in 2023. It noted that there would be a need for updated information 
from SC, and suggested holding two workshops, one before SC19 and one after. 
40  
  
202. 
RMI expressed concern that there would many meetings in 2023, and advocated minimizing the 
number of meetings while still being effective.  
203. 
The Chair noted that there was agreement on using the current CMM as a basis. She proposed a 
draft workplan on the basis of holding two workshops.  
204. 
In the ensuing discussion CCMs raised a number of issues, including timing and potential conflicts 
with other meetings, the advantages and disadvantages of electronic and in-person meetings, the potential 
for CCMs to engage outside the Commission process (e.g., through workshops such as that as referenced in 
WCPFC19-2022-DP17, as well as bilaterally), the importance of addressing South Pacific albacore as well 
as bigeye and yellowfin, and the mechanisms for requesting additional scientific analysis by the Scientific 
Services Provider (SPC). Several CCMs voiced support for holding an initial virtual meeting in the first 
quarter of the year.  
205. 
In summary the Chair noted the statement by FFA members that the TTM work focus on hard limits 
for purse seine fisheries, and the indication by CCMs for the need to also address longline limits and 
allocation issues. She noted the Commission Chair and Secretariat would take due consideration of timing 
issues in finalizing the arrangements, and stated that minor revisions in the approach might be made in 2023 
at the discretion of the new Commission Chair.  
206. 
WCPFC19 agreed on a Process to Negotiate a Revised Tropical Tuna Measure in 2023, 
with revisions to the time frames in the work plan to be made at the discretion of the new Chair 
of the Commission in consultation with CCMs and taking into account other RFMO meetings 
attended by CCMs. (Attachment H) 
 
6.4 
South Pacific Albacore 
207. 
The Chair noted WCPFC19-2022-14 Reference document for South Pacific albacore for the review 
of CMM 2015-02 and development of Harvest Strategies under CMM 2014-06, which contains the various 
relevant recommendations and decisions of SC18, TCC18 and the South Pacific albacore Roadmap IWG 
(SPALB_RM-IWG) to the issues to be discussed under Agenda Item 6.4. 
6.4.1 
Harvest strategy issues 
6.4.1.1 Review of any additional performance indicators, if available, and alternative 
target reference points  
208. 
Dr. Graham Pilling (SPC-OFP) presented WCPFC19-2022-15. Further analyses to inform 
discussions on South Pacific albacore objectives and the TRP. Discussions at WCPFC18 on the recalibrated 
TRP for this stock made it clear that the necessary catch reductions were not acceptable to managers. The 
Chair of the SPALB_RM-IWG requested further analyses to help inform discussion and clarify manager’s 
objectives for the fishery, and this paper presents the stock and fishery outcomes of different potential future 
changes in longline and troll catches (WCPFC Convention Area or South Pacific-wide) to highlight trade-
offs between objectives involved in alternative ‘candidate TRP’ levels. If longline and troll fisheries catch 
is maintained at 2017-2019 average levels (~72,200 mt in the WCPFC Convention Area and 15,600 mt in 
the remaining EPO), longline vulnerable biomass the catch rate proxy will decline relative to all benchmarks 
examined: the current management objective of 2013 vulnerable biomass levels + 8%, 2013 levels, and the 
2017-2019 average level. Risk of falling below the LRP increased to 22%, and stock depletion would be 
around 43% of SBF=0 in the WPCFC CA. To maintain vulnerable biomass at recent levels, or to achieve 
41  
  
increases, catch reductions would be required. The level of those reductions depended on the level of CPUE 
increase desired. The level of catch reduction also depended upon whether they were taken in the WCPFC 
Convention Area alone, or across the South Pacific. The degree of impact of catch reductions by 10% to 
50% relative to recent (2017-2019 average levels) on stock depletion, risk and CPUE are presented in the 
paper. 
209. 
Cook Islands on behalf of FFA members thanked SPC for their work on this issue and noted that 
the effective management of the southern longline fishery is of high importance to all CCMs targeting South 
Pacific albacore, and therefore must apply over the whole range of the stock (WCPFC Convention Area and 
EPO). FFA members stated they are committed to progressing the improved management of this key fishery 
through the harvest strategy approach and the implementation of zone-based management. FFA members 
reiterated the need to review the management objectives for this important stock, given that the recalibrated 
interim TRP required to achieve the current objective is untenable, and stated they would work with all 
CCMs through the SPALB_RM-IWG in order to bring a revised management objective and TRP to the 
Commission in 2023. 
210. 
 New Caledonia stated that for over 5 years it and other members have noted the South Pacific 
albacore fishery is economically unsustainable. It noted that the lack of progress to address this, and the 
need to develop an allocation that benefits SIDS and dependent territories. It noted the impacts of COVID-
19 on the ability of the Commission to progress the issue, and on communities and fisheries. New Caledonia 
stressed that the tuna market had been impacted, while all fishery costs increased, but not tuna prices. New 
Caledonia stated that although their fishery was small fishery “it is our fishery”. It supported a review of the 
management objectives, including the interim TRP. 
211. 
French Polynesia strongly supported the statement by New Caledonia, noting it is very important to 
consider the entire Pacific stock (including the WCPO and EPO) when considering impacts, and stressed 
the importance of the fishery. 
212. 
WCPFC19 noted with appreciation the analyses undertaken by the Scientific Services 
Provider to inform discussions on South Pacific albacore objectives and the target reference point 
(WCPFC19-2022-15). 
 
6.4.1.2 Review of additional work tasked by the SMD01 to support decision-making on 
management procedures.   
213. 
Dr Rob Scott (SPC) provided a presentation on WCPFC19-2022-16 Updates on management 
procedure evaluations for SP albacore since SMD01 to summarise the discussions of SC18 and SMD01 on 
the development of management procedures for South Pacific albacore. To support discussions on 
management objectives for South Pacific albacore, a range of catch reduction scenarios were presented to 
SC18. From these options several CCMs identified catch reductions of 10% and 20% from recent (2017-
2019) levels for further consideration. SC18 requested additional analyses to determine the impact of 
including or excluding the EPO fisheries from control by the management procedure. SMD01 further 
discussed the issue with respect to the troll fishery and requested a similar analysis to determine the impact 
of including or excluding the troll fishery from the control of the management procedure. The results of 
these analyses indicated that: i) if measures do not apply to the EPO an additional 2%-3% catch reduction 
is required in WCPFC Convention Area longline and troll fisheries to achieve the same stock depletion 
outcome (approximately 1500-2000 mt less WCPFC Convention Area catch in these two scenarios); ii) if 
measures do not apply to the WCPFC Convention Area troll fishery an additional 0-1% catch reduction 
in WCPFC Convention Area longline and EPO fisheries to achieve the same stock depletion outcome 
approx. 0 –750 mt less catch); and iii) if measures do not apply to either EPO fisheries or the WCPFC 
42  
  
Convention Area troll fishery an additional 3-4% catch reduction is required in WCPFC Convention Area 
longline fishery (approximately 2000 to 3000 mt less). It was noted that more recent catch estimates for the 
EPO (presented in WCPFC19-2022-IP06, Figure 1) indicate higher catches for 2021 than have been 
assumed in the analysis (approximately 45% higher than the 2017-2019 average EPO catch). In addition, 
the analysis assumed that catch reductions in the WCPFC Convention Area can be achieved without vessels 
moving across into the EPO and continuing to fish for South Pacific albacore, resulting in a spatial 
redistribution of albacore catches rather than a net reduction in overall catch. 
214. 
Samoa on behalf of FFA members emphasised the need for agreement on a revised management 
objective and an associated TRP for the fishery to support the continued development of the South Pacific 
albacore MP and to take into account SPC-OFP’s updated analysis based on the additional work tasked by 
SMD01. They noted that in its update SPC-OFP recommended securing compatible management in the 
EPO, and consider this an important element in managing the stock throughout its range, but queried how 
the Commission might achieve this. As such, FFA members proposed that the SPALB_RM-IWG be tasked 
to explore this matter and report back to WCPFC20. FFA members proposed that SPC-OFP continues to 
progress the development of the South Pacific albacore MP that makes provision for EPO catch, but 
suggested that the South Pacific albacore HCR would be applicable to the management of South Pacific 
albacore within the WCPFC Convention Area only. 
215. 
The USA stated that it supported distinct MPs for longline and troll fisheries, and commented that 
because WCPFC can only affect management in the WCPFC Convention Area, it should do its analysis 
without attempting to estimate or anticipate impacts in the IATTC convention area.  
216. 
New Zealand noted the relatively stable catch of South Pacific albacore through the troll fishery, 
and the relatively minor impact on the stock.  It stated that the troll fishery and longline fisheries for South 
Pacific albacore have different characteristics. In order to explore the implications of treating troll 
differently, at SMD01 New Zealand requested that SPC-OFP analyse the impact on the status of South 
Pacific albacore of either including or excluding troll fishing in the proposed MP. New Zealand stated its 
understanding that excluding the troll fishery would require a minor (1% at most) reduction in catch by the 
South Pacific albacore longline fishery in both the WCPFC and IATTC CAs. New Zealand stated that the 
bigger question relates to the inclusion or exclusion of the EPO, which is of far greater magnitude to the 
core question of improving the management of South Pacific albacore than the question of whether troll 
should be included or excluded. New Zealand stated the need to consider whether a common management 
approach should be applied across the entire South Pacific Ocean (for example both WCPFC and IATTC 
areas). It advocated that this would make sense for effective management of the South Pacific albacore stock 
as a whole, and to ensure that effort does not move to an uncontrolled EPO, stating it is notable that catches 
in EPO were 45% higher in 2021 compared to the 2017-2019 average levels. New Zealand stated that there 
are practical issues as to how to implement common management, and these would need to be worked 
through in the SPALB_RM-IWG during 2023. New Zealand stated that its position on these matters was 
still being worked through, and that it looked forward to focusing on these issues in the SPALB_RM-IWG 
in 2023. 
217. 
China stated that regarding whether necessary to include the troll fishery, it would be difficult for 
China to suggest to its longline fishery that a reduction was needed if all fisheries were not included. China 
suggested the need to work intersessionally with other CCMs to find a solution. Regarding the EPO, China 
stated that it tabled a proposal at IATTC to freeze the number of vessels fishing for South Pacific albacore, 
but stated that IATTC has different types of measures, and indicated that there is no current basis for IATTC 
to take concrete action of this type. China stated that WCPFC should not wait for another RFMO before 
taking action. 
43  
  
218. 
New Caledonia thanked New Zealand for highlighting a number of issues that needed to be 
addressed in adopting MPs for South Pacific albacore. 
219. 
Chinese Taipei noted the importance of the fishery. Regarding the management procedures, it noted 
that there may be difficulties if the focus is solely on the WCPO in the form of significant impacts on the 
conservation of the stock in future. It urged the Commission to work with IATTC. It stated that all fisheries 
taking South Pacific albacore should be included to ensure fairness, as otherwise some fisheries would 
effectively be punished. Chinese Taipei committed to working with the Chair of the SPALB_RM-IWG and 
all CCMs to get results. 
220. 
French Polynesia strongly supported New Zealand’s comments. 
221. 
The Chair noted the differing views on a joint approach with IATTC, and the broad agreement that 
it was important to cover all fisheries.  
222. 
WCPFC19 noted the additional work tasked by SMD01 to support decision-making on 
management procedures for South Pacific albacore (WCPFC19-2022-16).  
 
6.4.2 
Review of CMM 2015-02 
6.4.2.1 
Review of the SPA Roadmap-IWG activities 
223. 
Ms Neomai Ravitu (Fiji), Chair of the SPALB_RM-IWG, presented a summary of the work of the 
IWG, with reference to WCPFC-SPALB_RM-2022-00 Chair's Report of the SPALB Roadmap IWG 
Progress, dated 19 August 2022.  
224. 
New Caledonia stated that regarding South Pacific Albacore additional issues had been raised and 
should be addressed, and suggest the frequency of the roadmap meetings be increased in 2023.  
225. 
The USA stated it appreciated the robust discussion at the meeting held at WPCFC19, and noted it 
looked forward to additional questions. It stated it was happy to see efforts to strengthen the focus on climate 
change by including climate change in the latest draft TOR.  
226. 
China thanked the IWG chair for her excellent leadership, and stated that a change of direction was 
sought which might require the involvement of the Scientific Services Provider. China suggested developing 
a workplan to guide work of the IWG. 
227. 
WCPFC noted with appreciation the Report of the Chair of the SPA Roadmap-IWG 
(WCPFC19-2022-SPALB_RM). 
228. 
WCPFC19 adopted the terms of reference and work plan for the SPA Roadmap-IWG 
(Attachment I). 
 
6.5 
North Pacific Albacore 
6.5.1 
Review of CMM 2019-03  
229. 
No issues were considered under this agenda item.  
44  
  
6.5.2 
Harvest Strategy proposal from NC18 
230. 
The Chair noted that the Harvest Strategy for North Pacific Albacore, contained in WCPFC19-
2022-17, Attachment A, was introduced under Agenda Item 4, and welcomed comments on the proposal.  
231. 
Kiribati on behalf of FFA members thanked the NC for the proposal and stated they were generally 
supportive of having a harvest strategy for North Pacific albacore in the WCPO, but sought clarification on 
several questions, noting that the answers would help FFA members better understand the merits of the 
proposed harvest strategy. The questions were as follow: (i) What justification is there for selecting the time 
period 2006-2015 in management objective 1(b)? The NC Chair stated the time period was selected because 
the CMM for North Pacific albacore had proven effective at maintaining fishing effort, and was slated to 
remain at that level for 10 years. (ii) Why is an LRP of 14% proposed when the WCPFC has adopted a 
biomass-based LRP of 20% for its four key tuna species, and this was also used in the North Pacific albacore 
tuna stock assessment done in 2020. The NC Chair stated that 20% is used as a proxy when there is no 
estimate of MSY, while 14% is the best estimate for this stock. (iii) Why is a conceptual diagram of an HCR 
provided in the proposed harvest strategy rather than an HCR equation? The NC Chair stated that NC hoped 
to provide an HCR equation to the Commission in 2023. (iv) What is the area of application for the proposed 
Harvest Strategy? The NC Chair did not provide an answer. (v) Has an MSE been undertaken to help 
evaluate the performance of the proposed HCR specifically for the WCPO? If so, can the Commission be 
provided with the results of this evaluation to help in assessing the performance of the HCR and proposed 
harvest strategy against the management objectives? The NC Chair stated that an MSE was undertaken in 
2018 or 2019 and was reported to SC and the Commission at that time.   
232. 
WCPFC19 adopted the HS-2022-01 Harvest Strategy for North Pacific Albacore 
presented by the Northern Committee (Attachment J). 
 
6.6 
Pacific Bluefin Tuna 
6.6.1 
Review of CMM 2021-02 
233. 
Korea stated that it appreciated the comments provided at the NC17 meeting regarding Korea’s 
views on bluefin tuna, and looked forward to further discussions with CCMs in 2023. Korea also gave a 
brief introduction to its delegation paper regarding purse seine bluefin tuna bycatch in set net fisheries in 
Korean territorial waters (WCPFC19-2022-DP12 Information Paper on the Bycatch of Pacific Bluefin Tuna 
in Set Net Fisheries in its Territorial Waters).  
234. 
WCPFC19 noted WCPFC19-2022-DP12 presented by Korea and that Korea would bring 
a proposal on Pacific bluefin CMM to the Joint NC/IATTC Working Group, NC19 and 
WCPFC20 in 2023. 
 
6.7 
North Pacific Swordfish 
6.7.1 
Proposal from NC18 
235. 
The Chair noted that the NC’s proposed CMM for North Pacific Swordfish, contained in 
WCPFC19-2022-17, Attachment B, was introduced under Agenda Item 4, and welcomed comments on 
the proposal.  
45  
  
236. 
The USA stated it supported adoption of the proposal. It further stated that the Commission should 
consider how to manage swordfish across the entire range of the stock, and suggested considering how to 
revise the proposal at NC19 with that in mind.  
237. 
RMI, on behalf of FFA members, stated that FFA members supported the need for a CMM to restrict 
fishing effort on North Pacific swordfish stocks, and noted that the EPO swordfish stock has recently 
experienced overfishing relative to MSY-based reference points. FFA members referenced their proposed 
revised CMM to strengthen the existing measure for Southwest Pacific swordfish (CMM 2009-03) in 
WCPFC19-2022-DP07, stating that the current CMM contains no restrictions on fishing mortality in the 
high seas area north of 20°S. The CMM’s flag-based limits south of 20°S in combination with unconstrained 
catches north of 20°S may be too high to prevent future overfishing. Adding to these concerns is the 
uncertainty in the stock boundary between WCNPO stock and EPO stock. FFA members noted that the 
ability of the proposed CMM to achieve its objectives would be highly dependent on the effectiveness of 
using 2008-2010 average annual levels to restrict both the overall fishing effort and that of each fishery that 
takes swordfish in the high seas and EEZs, within the WCPFC Convention Area north of 20° N. To that end, 
FFA members asked the NC to clarify the term “fisheries taking North Pacific swordfish” used in the NC’s 
proposed CMM, and asked if this refers to all fisheries that record over 200 tonnes of North Pacific swordfish 
catch per year? In addition, they inquired how fishing effort is defined in these fisheries and what 
independent verification is available for those effort limits? They noted the absence of supporting data 
regarding how effective the 2008-2010 average annual levels would be in restricting fishing effort, and 
stated they looked forward to engaging with other CCMs to determine this, and suggested it be based on the 
best available science. Finally, FFA members stated their full support for the provision that exempts SIDS 
from the measure and thanked the NC for including that in the draft CMM.  
238. 
The NC Chair stated the CMM would apply only north of 20°N, but that the Commission was 
concerned about the entire migration area of the stock; he stated he hoped that supplementary measures to 
cover whole range could be adopted in the near future, and that a complementary CMM for the stock in the 
southern area could be adopted. He stated that the CMM would apply to both EEZs and the high seas, and 
would exclude SIDS. 
239. 
The EU stated it agreed with concerns expressed by RMI in terms of the east and west portions of 
the northern stock, and stated it was unclear what metric was used for various fisheries. The EU noted RMI’s 
comment that there is merit in clarifying the fisheries to which these restrictions would apply, and stated the 
need to distinguish between target and bycatch fisheries. The EU stated that there would be value in 
amending the proposal to include catch limits for target fisheries as is done for Southwest Pacific swordfish.   
240. 
The NC Chair stated that their proposal would constitute the first CMM for this stock, noting that 
such a CMM had been discussed repeatedly but never enacted. The NC Chair stated that the CMM would 
simply serve to freeze fishing effort, and could be revised over time. He stated that NC was looking at all 
fishing activities that catch swordfish, including small-scale fishing activities, and would report back to 
WCPFC20 regarding the CMM’s effectiveness.  
241. 
Following further consultations with the EU, the NC Chair stated that the EU had concerns with the 
preamble, and an issue to clarify the main body, but that the substance of the CMM would not be affected 
by the EU’s suggested changes. In view of the serious time constraints faced at WCPFC19, and resulting 
challenges in convening an NC meeting, the NC Chair suggest that these changes would be made at NC19 
(in July 2023). With that understanding he asked the EU’s indulgence to approve the CMM as proposed, 
with the modifications to be made at NC19. The EU agreed with the NC Chair’s proposal, in light of the 
time constraints. 
46  
  
242. 
The Chair congratulated the NC and the Commission for approving the WCPFC’s first CMM for 
North Pacific swordfish.  
243. 
WCPFC19 adopted CMM 2022-02 Conservation and Management Measure for North 
Pacific Swordfish presented by the Northern Committee. (Attachment K) 
 
6.8 
  
Southwest Pacific Swordfish 
6.8.1 
Review of Southwest Pacific swordfish fishery 
244. 
There was no discussion under this agenda item.  
6.8.2 
Review of CMM 2009-03 
245. 
The Chair stated that Australia, on behalf of FFA members, introduced WCPFC19-2022-DP07 
Proposal for a CMM for Southwest Pacific swordfish under Agenda Item 4.   
246. 
New Zealand on behalf of FFA members stated they are committed to developing a strengthened 
CMM for Southwest Pacific swordfish; noting the latest fisheries information, data, and science, they 
proposed a strengthened CMM, highlighting: zone-based management, compatible management and limits 
for the high seas, the sovereign rights of coastal states, and special requirements of SIDS and participating 
territories. They stated that the current CMM for Southwest Pacific swordfish contains no restrictions on 
fishing mortality in the high seas area north of 20°S and contains flag-based limits south of 20°S; the flag-
based limits combined with unconstrained catches north of 20°S may be too high to prevent future 
overfishing. FFA members noted the healthy stock status of Southwest Pacific swordfish, and stated that the 
proposed measure does not seek to reduce recent catch levels. FFA members stated that they are seeking to 
implement a CMM that maintains biomass depletion at recent levels to maintain the health of the stock and 
provide development opportunities for SIDS. FFA members stated that they look forward to a constructive 
dialogue with other CCMs on this strengthened CMM for Southwest Pacific swordfish, and reiterated that 
uncertainty should not be a reason to avoid protective action and management of the stock. FFA members, 
led by Australia, offered to engage bilaterally or engage in a small working group to progress the measure 
for adoption at WCPFC19. 
247. 
Korea supported the idea of expanding the geographic scope of application, noting that considerable 
catch takes place from 0° to 20°S. They stated that the most recent stock assessment indicates that Southwest 
Pacific swordfish is not overfished or subject to overfishing. It noted that catch over the prior 3 years had 
been low (as referenced in WCPFC19-2022-IP08), and that in light of this some parts of the proposal are 
excessively restrictive; they highlighted in particular zone-based management, stating it may constrain 
fishing operations in the high seas more than needed, if the purpose is to enable development of CCM 
fisheries. They noted that the CMM proposes a ban on light stocks and squid bait for longline fisheries 
taking Southwest Pacific swordfish as bycatch, and inquired regarding the impact on the catch rate of target 
species such as bigeye and yellowfin. Korea also inquired whether there had been any analysis of these 
issues, and whether SPC had any insights. 
248. 
The EU concurred regarding the healthy status of the stock, and the need to expand the scope of the 
current CMM to include all catch south of the equator. It stated that a range of other elements in the CMM 
go beyond this, which makes the conversation more difficult. The EU stated that it would be happy to discuss 
how to achieve the common objective to ensure that all components of fishing mortality are covered by the 
CMM. 
47  
  
249. 
Solomon Islands on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau recognized the substantial time and effort that 
had been put in by Australia to develop the proposal to the stage where it could be considered at WCPFC19. 
They noted that the approach taken by Australia was exemplary for engaging SIDS in the development of a 
CMM that encompasses the special requirements of SIDS and participating territories, recognizes zone-
based management, and looks to develop compatible management and limits for the high seas. The PNA 
and Tokelau stated their support for the FFA proposal to revise and strengthen CMM 2009-03. 
250. 
Chinese Taipei noted the stock status had improved, and stated it saw no provision in the current 
CMM that would prevent SIDS from developing their fisheries. It stated it did not see the need to take 
stronger measures and had raised these issues bilaterally. 
251. 
China stated it had already expressed its concerns to the proponents. It also proposed using different 
years for setting the TAC, as the catch in period proposed was very low. China encouraged the delegations 
attending WCPFC19 in person to reach an agreement. 
252. 
Tonga on behalf of FFA members stated that managing fisheries is not just about avoiding 
overfished stocks, it is also about achieving other objectives including in this case, economic viability, and 
maintaining development opportunities for SIDS. They stated that this approach had been pursued in other 
CMMs and associated processes including for tropical tunas and albacore. They stated that while the 
measure is not a harvest strategy, there is no reason it can’t seek to achieve similar outcomes and emphasised 
that stock sustainability is only one (albeit a very important) consideration. 
253. 
French Polynesia stated that this was a very important step that is needed, and constituted an 
improvement, and stated it would work with other CCMs on it. 
254. 
Australia supported the comments of its FFA colleagues, and stated it was encouraged by the healthy 
status of the stock. It stated it was important to act when a stock is healthy and not in trouble. Regarding the 
TAC, it stated it was based on projection work undertaken by SPC that looks at biomass depletion at recent 
catch levels. Australia acknowledged the issue raised by China. It stated the desire to develop a new CMM 
that has appropriate elements and includes development opportunities.  
255. 
China indicated the issue should be considered by SC, noting that a projection from SPC was not 
equivalent to a recommendation from SC. Australia stated that determination of TRPs and management 
objectives was within the purview of the Commission, supported by scientific advice, and stated its view 
that the issue of consideration by SC had been fulfilled. 
256. 
Following further negotiations in the SWG, and regarding the proposed recommendations, the EU 
stated that it could support the conclusion to extend management to the entire area south of the equator, and 
thanked CCMs for their hard work on the issue. It stated that CCMs had identified an area of common 
interest and committed to working on it further intersessionally. 
257. 
Australia thanked CCMs for their engagement at WCPFC19, both bilaterally and in the SWG, on 
FFA’s proposal to strengthen the management of Southwest Pacific swordfish. It stated that while it is clear 
that all CCMs share the view that some form of management needs to cover the full range of the stock, to 
the equator in the WCPFC Convention Area, there was no consensus on how to achieve this. Australia stated 
its disappointment that the Commission would be unable to adopt a revised CMM at WCPFC19, while 
acknowledging the constructive engagement from a number of CCMs, in particular Japan, China and the 
USA, in putting forward views on limits and other aspects of the CMM that would contribute to an effective 
management measure for this stock. Australia noted that it had stated for some years that the existing CMM 
is not effective in that it does not prevent increases in mortality that would result in depletion of this stock 
in a manner that would impact sustainability, the viability of fisheries that fish for swordfish, and the rights 
and interests of coastal States, especially SIDS, to develop their aspirations for this fishery. It stated that 
48  
  
simply extending existing management arrangements to the full range of the stock would not address these 
fundamental flaws. It stated it recognises that the stock is in good shape and stated its desire to keep it that 
way – the idea that action should only be taken when a stock is in trouble is contrary to good fisheries 
management. Similarly, Australia noted that the current CMM, which could facilitate unconstrained fishing 
for swordfish, does not protect SIDS interests. Australia stated it worked closely with SIDS and territories 
over several years to develop a proposal that would genuinely protect SIDS interests, as articulated in a 
thorough and meaningful CMM 2013-06 assessment. It noted that as an FFA proposal, the proposal 
represented the collective views of 15 of the Commission’s SIDS and Territories, and Australia also 
welcomed the strong support of French Polynesia and New Caledonia for this work. Australia called on 
CCMs to carefully consider how CCMs could achieve the shared goal of extending management to 
encompass catches across the full range of the stock in the WCPFC Convention Area, while achieving the 
critical goals of achieving biological and economic objectives and protecting the interests and aspirations of 
SIDS and territories. 
258. 
New Zealand and Cook Islands voiced disappointment that no further progress would be made at 
WCPFC19, and expressed the hope that the issues could be addressed and resolved in 2023.  
259. 
The EU stated it engaged in the process and offered a range of comments and suggestions that it 
hoped were constructive. It noted that Southwest Pacific swordfish stocks were healthy and stated that the 
existing CMM had helped in that regard. It stated that there was insufficient time to negotiate the many 
elements that were proposed (allocating a TAC, and zone vs. flag-based limits).  
260. 
Niue supported the work and shared the concerns of other CCMs, and their disappointment that the 
proposal did not pass, noting that the fishery is not adequately managed to ensure sustainability. 
261. 
The EU reiterated its view that the current measure does not prevent any CCMs from developing a 
fishery for these stocks. In response the Cook Islands rejected the position held by the EU, and stated that 
unrestricted fishing did not provide opportunities for SIDS, as an unrestricted fishery was not sustainable. 
262. 
WCPFC agreed that progress should be made in 2023 on ensuring Southwest Pacific 
swordfish management extends beyond South of 20o S, to the entire Southwest Pacific swordfish 
stock in the WCPFC convention area, south of the equator. 
263. 
WCPFC noted that the SWG could not reach consensus on any other substantive matter 
regarding the proposed measure. 
 
6.9 
North Pacific Striped Marlin 
6.9.1 
Review of CMM 2010-01 
264. 
The Chair noted that the stock was addressed by the ISC in its presentation under Agenda Item 6.1. 
265. 
The EU stated it wished to record its concern that the review of CMM 2010-01 could not be 
addressed given the lack of scientific advice, and stated it hoped that ISC could provide the information 
needed to develop a rebuilding plan for the stock in 2023.  
266. 
FSM on behalf of FFA members noted with disappointment the delays in achieving conservation 
and management advice for North Pacific striped marlin, and that they had repeated this concern for many 
years. They stated they looked forward to the complete benchmark assessment to progress a CMM, and 
looked forward to contributing to discussions on appropriate and mutually agreed measures that will achieve 
49  
  
the rebuilding target of the stock. They stated that in the meantime, given the urgent need for stronger 
measures to reduce fishing mortality, alternative measures, such as non-retention, were urgently needed to 
reduce targeting of striped marlin in the North Pacific, and observed that this would be consistent with the 
Commission’s approach towards similarly depleted stocks such as oceanic whitetip and silky sharks. 
267. 
WCPFC19 noted that a proposed CMM on North Pacific striped marlin was deferred 
until 2023 and expressed concern regarding the continued delay in the rebuilding plans for the 
stock. 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 7  — HARVEST STRATEGY WORKPLAN 
268. 
The Chair referenced WCPFC19-2022-DP06 Proposed Amendment to CMM 2014-06 on 
Establishing a Harvest Strategy for Key Fisheries and Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, 
which was introduced under Agenda Item 4.  
269. 
Cook Islands stated on behalf of FFA members that no proposals for amendments to the proposed 
amendment to CMM 2014-06 had been received during WCPFC19. 
270. 
WCPFC19 adopted CMM 2022-03 Conservation and Management Measure on 
Establishing a Harvest Strategy for key fisheries and stocks in the Western and Central Pacific 
Ocean (Attachment L) 
 
7.1 
Review of Indicative Work Plan 
271. 
The Chair introduced the agenda item, noting the need to review and update the Harvest Strategy 
Work Plan (HSWP) to reflect the progress achieved to date and to agree on timelines for future milestones. 
The Chair stated that Australia had previously taken the lead to coordinate updates to the work plan and 
stated that CCMs in the Heads of Delegations meeting prior to WCPFC19 had requested that Australia 
continue in that role. 
272. 
Dr. James Larcombe (Australia) referenced WCPFC19-2022-19 Reference Document on the 
progress of the Harvest Strategy Workplan under CMM 2014-06. He reviewed the purpose of the HSWP, 
noting it is a high-level plan and focussed on the six elements of the harvest strategy as contained within the 
CMM. He stated it is ambitious, and updated annually. He noted the extensive work done by the Commission, 
SC and SPC toward the harvest strategy, and stated that a good summary of the progress to date was 
contained in the papers prepared for SMD01 (https://meetings.wcpfc.int/meetings/smd01). Updates to the 
HSWP since 2021 have been based on interventions from CCMs and discussions with SPC. He stated that 
the plan had been extended for 2 years to 2026, noting that this is important for several reasons, including 
to make clear to possible future funders that much work remains. He noted that SPC’s work on the harvest 
strategy had been funded in large part by New Zealand, as well as other funders, including the EU, and that 
further funding would be required. Regarding pending decisions, he observed that a CMM for skipjack was 
under discussion at WCPFC19, and the HSWP would reflect the outcomes. Regarding South Pacific 
albacore, a candidate MP was not ready in 2022, and this was discussed at SMD01. He stated that the 
discussions from the SPALB_RM-IWG at WCPFC19 would be reflected in the plan. For bigeye and 
yellowfin, he stated it was likely the operating models would require redevelopment following the stock 
assessment peer review process (ongoing during WCPFC19), which would affect the 2023 stock 
assessments and likely the design of the operating models. He noted that the multi-species development 
50  
  
work is also ongoing. He observed he had rescheduled agreement on bigeye and yellowfin TRPs to 2024, 
and tentatively scheduled bigeye and yellowfin MPs for 2026. He highlighted the staggered nature of the 
activities, first skipjack, then albacore, then bigeye and yellowfin which he noted is important for SPC to be 
able to service the activities, and for the CCMs to be able to address issues one at a time, and that this 
approach was the intent from the outset. He stated that the HSWP would be updated following discussions 
at WCPFC19.  
273. 
Japan thanked Australia for its work, and observed that the discussion on the bigeye and yellowfin 
TRP was originally scheduled for 2022, and the discussion on the MP(s) for 2023; the proposed workplan 
delays the TRP discussion for these species to 2024, and the MP discussions to 2026. Japan observed that 
this was a significant delay, and proposed scheduling the yellowfin and bigeye MP discussions for 2025. Dr 
Larcombe responded that these dates were tentative, but that experience suggested the process takes longer 
than it would first appear. He noted that there was some technical work that has to happen over the next 2 
years, but stated that it was potentially feasible to schedule MP adoption for yellowfin and bigeye in 2025. 
274. 
Samoa, on behalf of FFA members, noted the skipjack management procedure may be adopted at 
WCPFC19 in alignment with the HSWP, but stated that the South Pacific albacore MP and TRPs for both 
yellowfin and bigeye tuna would not be ready for adoption until 2024.  They stated that as suggested in their 
intervention under Agenda Item 6.2.1.3, FFA members supported rescheduling the selection of TRPs for 
the bigeye and yellowfin tuna stocks to 2024, while the Commission continues to develop the multi-species 
modelling framework and other work such as the consideration of candidate management procedures for the 
tropical longline fisheries. They stated that the same applied to the South Pacific albacore MP; the timeframe 
to adopt that MP needs to be extended until more work can be done to develop the axes of uncertainty in the 
operating models and to give the necessary time for SC and the Commission to properly evaluate the 
candidate, model-based HCRs currently under development.  Further, there are important considerations 
around the inclusion of the EPO on the performance of the MP. They stated that FFA members remain very 
committed to the successful implementation of the HSWP, but recognise that the plan is ambitious and will 
need to be updated based on the decisions made at WCPFC19; they noted that SMD01 agreed that the HSWP 
would be updated at WCPFC19. FFA members also encouraged further capacity-building initiatives and 
expressed their appreciation for the two Harvest Strategy Capacity Building workshops organised by the 
WCPFC Secretariat in 2022 to support CCMs understanding of harvest strategy components and 
implications. They noted that such initiatives greatly assist CCMs, and particularly SIDS, in participating 
fully and having confidence in the harvest strategy development process and its outcomes when 
implemented. 
275. 
RMI agreed that adoption of a bigeye and yellowfin MP could be scheduled for 2025, but stated 
that it would be contingent on what is decided at WCPFC19 in terms of the skipjack MP, as the various 
components are all related. RMI inquired regarding the implications for the HSWP and various other work 
streams should the Commission fail to reach a decision on a skipjack MP at WCPFC19. Dr Larcombe stated 
that for the skipjack MP additional technical work was not needed, and the Commission was well placed to 
make a decision; thus the issue was reaching a decision through negotiation. If no decision was reached SPC 
would have to do additional work on skipjack for an extra year or so, which would increase its workload to 
some degree, and this could create a backlog and delay other elements of the harvest strategy work. 
276. 
Following relevant outcomes at WCPFC19, Australia presented an updated Indicative Workplan 
for the Adoption of Harvest Strategies. 
277. 
WCPFC19 adopted the updated Indicative Workplan for the Adoption of Harvest 
Strategies under CMM 2014-06 (Attachment M). 
 
51  
  
7.2 
Science-Management Dialogue   
278. 
The Executive Director introduced WCPFC19-2022-20 Reference Document on the Science-
Management Dialogue, which highlighted the key issues that the Commission needs to consider for 
determining the future arrangements of the Science-Management Dialogue (SMD). He noted that the 
substantive outcomes of the SMD01 were addressed under Agenda Item 6. He further noted that the SMD01 
was held on a trial basis on 19 and 21 of August 2022. The agenda for the SMD01 was based on a set of 
‘focus areas’ provided by the Commission and views and comments of CCMs.  One of the agenda items 
sought guidance from the SMD01 on the focus and timing of future meetings of the SMD, which the SMD01 
deferred to the Commission.  The Executive Director stated that the reference paper WCPFC19-2022-20, 
outlines in paragraph 7, some issues that may guide the Commission deliberations on future arrangements 
for the SMD including whether it should be constituted formally such as other subsidiary bodies, so it can 
render recommendations to the Commission; what the schedule of meetings and focus areas should be; 
whether it should held in a similar fashion to SMD01, with focus areas provided; what additional training 
and capacity building needs CCMs have; and whether the short term focus should align with the HSWP. He 
further stated that paragraph 8 of the paper highlights some longer-term issues which are provided for 
information but not for immediate resolution. 
279. 
Palau on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau stated the SMD was useful for building understanding 
among managers and science personnel in the initial stage of development and operation of harvest 
strategies, but that it was not very useful considering the time involved in advancing work on the skipjack 
MP. They stated they could support holding another SMD in 2024 to support the further development and 
initial operation on harvest strategies with the purpose of that SMD to be defined by the Commission in 
2023 when there is a better idea of what the priorities are in the HSWP for 2024. They did not support having 
an SMD in 2023, while noting some FFA members requested consideration of an SMD in 2023 for South 
Pacific albacore. They stated that their priorities for 2023 are work on the TTM and the CMS, which would 
not leave room for an SMD as well.   
280. 
Kiribati, on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau, supported the statement delivered by Palau, noting the 
SMD was useful to build understanding on the development and early stage of implementation of harvest 
strategy work. However, it did not support holding the SMD as a separate ongoing meeting. It stated that in 
considering any future SMDs that the harvest strategy process could be simply added to the existing 
Commission programme, and that harvest strategy work should be undertaken without establishing any new 
Commission meetings or bodies. They stated they were open to discussions around options for streamlining 
some of the other elements of the Commission’s work, but did not support a permanent SMD. 
281. 
The EU noted the need for a flexible, collective process, and observed that at WCPFFC19 some 
discussions had involved science and management issues, such as the discussion on a harvest strategy for 
skipjack and stated that these issues could have been progressed through a dedicated SMD. The EU stated 
it would prefer that the SMD process be more institutionalised, and possibly be aligned with the HSWP. 
The EU also voiced support for continued capacity building. The EU suggested that an annual paper be 
prepared for the Commission on what harvest strategy activities occurred throughout year. The EU also 
stated it would welcome an opportunity for CCM scientists to engage with SPC on harvest strategy issues 
during the year, stating that this would allow more feedback to CCMs, and would be helpful in progressing 
the work. In terms of scheduling SMD meetings, the EU stated that holding it directly after SC was not ideal 
but stated it was flexible on that issue. 
282. 
Australia stated that SMD01 was helpful in terms of progressing the skipjack MP. It stated that it 
could agree to not hold an SMD in 2023. It stated that the discussions in the South Pacific albacore SWG 
and the presentation on the HSWP suggested an SMD could be useful in 2024, focussed on adoption of the 
52  
  
South Pacific albacore MP. It suggested looking at the tasks in the HSWP which would benefit from such a 
forum. 
283. 
RMI stated that it participated in SMD01 with keen interest and found it very useful in focussing on 
the skipjack MP. RMI stated that building understanding of the science is important and useful for 
management decisions, and supported continuation of such dialogues on a case-by-case basis, in line with 
the work scheduled through the HSWP. RMI looked forward to seeing the skipjack MP as an outcome at 
WCPFC19, noting that if agreement could not be reached it called into question the value of the SMD 
process. RMI stated that the priorities for 2023 should be the TTM, modifying the CMS, and running the 
skipjack MP. 
284. 
New Zealand acknowledged the value of SMD01, which prepared for the discussions on the 
skipjack MP. It agreed that an SMD would not be needed in 2023, given that the SPALB_RM-IWG would 
be focussing on the harvest strategy issues for that species and suggested it would be useful when the focus 
turned to a South Pacific albacore MP. In terms of timing New Zealand stated it would prefer a gap after SC 
so that SC outcomes could be considered, and stated that there is scope for the SMD to be virtual. 
285. 
Cook Islands agreed that this is an important discussion, and noted the need for interface between 
scientists and managers. It stated that as noted by RMI, SMD01 was valuable in advancing the skipjack MP, 
while a future SMD could help progress work on South Pacific albacore. It agreed that the timing of SMDs 
is important, and suggested that the SPALB_RM-IWG could consider its progress and the need for an SMD 
in 2023 versus 2024.  
286. 
Palau supported RMI’s comment noting the need of its delegation for scientific advice for 
management, and stated that if scientists had reached agreement, the Commission should move forward with 
MPs. 
287. 
PNG support the prior statement by Palau on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau, and the statement by 
RMI. PNG stated its 2023 priorities are the TTM renewal and work on the CMS. It agreed on the importance 
of the SMD for harvest strategy work, and stated that an SMD could be useful if it did not interfere with 
work on the TTM and the CMS, and suggested that SPC could possibly advise on this. 
288. 
Indonesia stated it is important to have SMDs to ensure CCMs have a shared understanding of the 
underlying science. It stated its support for holding an SMD in 2023, while noting the substantial work to 
be done on the TTM. It suggested holding an SMD after SC, but preferred for it to be virtual. 
289. 
The Ocean Foundation and Pew Charitable Trusts stated that it was encouraging to hear widespread 
support for the SMD process, and urged the Commission to adopt a permanent process to hold SMD. They 
stated it would be useful to set expectations that this discussion is important to the Commission and will 
continue in future years, as no other body brings together scientists, managers and stakeholders to have these 
discussions. They stated that a meeting in 2023 would be needed given the large amount of work to progress 
MPs for South Pacific albacore and remaining work on skipjack, depending on the output of WCPFC19. 
They also stated that it is important to build on the momentum from SMD01, and suggested that the 
Commission should feel good about the process. Members were well prepared, sought useful clarifications, 
exchanged views, and identified areas of further work. They stated that the dialogue process will be critical 
to enable the Commission to meet the goals in its HSWP. 
290. 
The Chair noted that CCMs recognized the merit of the SMD process, but expressed the view that 
the main focus for 2023 should be on revision of TTM, which would make it hard to hold an SMD; the need 
for an SMD in 2024 could be assessed depending on HSWP implementation. The Chair also noted that 
scientists and managers were interacting to progress specific harvest strategy-related issues, but that this 
was taking place outside an organized SMD process. 
53  
  
291. 
WCPFC19 noted the value of the SMD01 in assisting to progress a Management 
Procedure for skipjack tuna.  Given the heavy workload in 2023, particularly with the review of 
the Tropical Tuna CMM, WCPFC19 agreed not to hold an SMD in 2023 and agreed to assess 
the need to hold an SMD in 2024 depending on progress in the Commission’s harvest strategy 
work. 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 8  — WCPO SHARK STOCKS AND BYCATCH MITIGATION 
292. 
The Chair stated that under Agenda Item 8 the meeting would consider issues concerning the 
conservation and management of shark stocks within the purview of the WCPFC, and also discuss other 
bycatch mitigation issues such as seabird mitigation, best practices for safe handling and release of 
cetaceans, and ecosystem and climate indicators.  
8.1 
Sharks 
8.1.1 
Review of the status of WCPO shark stocks 
293. 
Dr. Paul Hammer (SPC-OFP) presented a summary of the status of key WCPFC key shark species, 
with a focus on the two most recent shark assessments in the WCPFC Convention Area: Southwest Pacific 
blue shark (conducted over 2021 and 2022) and Southwest Pacific mako shark (conducted in 2022). The 
presentation noted the current WCPFC key sharks that include: mako shark (2 species), blue shark, thresher 
sharks (3 species), silky shark, oceanic whitetip shark, whale shark, hammerhead sharks (4 species), and 
porbeagle shark (south of 20°S). The presentation noted the key documents that provide provisions for 
general shark management (CMM 2019-04), listing of sharks as WCPFC key sharks (WCPFC Key 
Document SC-08, 2012), and guiding research and assessment scheduling (2021-2025 Shark Research Plan; 
SC16-EB-IP-01). The Southwest Pacific blue shark assessment began in 2021. The assessment presented in 
that year was a thorough integrated assessments using Stock Synthesis, and included a large range of 
uncertainties. The assessment presented an ensemble of 3,888 models as a basis for management advice. 
However, the SC was concerned that the model ensemble required refinements to reduce the number of 
models, as it was difficult for the SC to consider the merits and relative reliability of so many models. In 
2022, the assessment team conducted further work to refine the model ensemble down to 288 models that 
better reflected uncertainty and this model ensemble was accepted by SC18 to be the basis for management 
advice. Based on the revised set of 288 models, the assessment indicated that according to MSY based 
reference points (noting there are not alternative reference points adopted for WCPFC sharks) the blue shark 
stock in the Southwest Pacific was not overfished (SB > SBMSY) and overfishing was not occurring (F < 
FMSY). A summary of the attempted assessment of shortfin mako shark in the Southwest Pacific Ocean was 
then provided. The assessment attempted an integrated assessment using Stock Synthesis. The assessment 
confronted many issues with data quantity and data coverage, and also noted conflicting trends in CPUE 
that were problematic to understand and model. The model outputs where highly sensitive to data and other 
assumptions and were not considered reliable enough to be a basis for management advice. The SC18 did 
not accept the assessment as a basis for management advice. The status of the shortfin mako shark stock in 
the Southwest Pacific Ocean remains uncertain. Some problematic areas for future assessment attempts were 
raised, in particular, the fact that there are very few data of other information on reproductive sized females. 
This makes any assessment or risk-based approach that aims to provide indication of the status/risks for the 
reproductive component of the stock difficult. Further, catch reconstruction continues to provide a major 
uncertainty in shark assessments, and it was recommended that shark catch estimates are also provided for 
north and south of the equator.  The presentation finished with a summary table of the current knowledge 
of stock status for the WCPFC key sharks, and their listings under the IUCN Red List and CITES 
54  
  
appendices, noting all key sharks except blue shark are CITES Appendix II listed. The 2021-2025 shark 
research plan indicated that the next assessment for key sharks in the WCPO is silky shark, with the 
recommendation that this (and future shark assessments) occur across two years, with work on the 
assessment inputs occurring in 2023 and the assessment conducted in 2024. The recommendation to run 
shark assessments across two years acknowledges the challenges with these assessments, including the 
additional work required to do catch reconstructions and better incorporate patchy and uncertain data, but 
also that shark assessments are funded as WCPFC projects for which contracts are typically only agreed by 
February. This leaves only 4-5 months to complete the assessment by the SC meeting. Experience has shown 
that this is not enough time. 
294. 
WCPFC19 noted with appreciation the presentations by the Scientific Services Provider 
and the ISC on the status of WCPO shark stocks. 
 
8.1.1.1 Southwest Pacific blue shark 
295. 
The Chair noted WCPFC19-2022-21 Reference Document for Southwest Pacific blue shark, and 
stated that the key recommendation from SC for the Commission’s consideration is to note the SC18 advice 
“that Southwest Pacific blue shark is unlikely to be overfished and it is unlikely that overfishing is occurring 
when considered against MSY and depletion-based reference points”.  
296. 
The EU noted that much work had been done on Southwest Pacific blue shark, and reminded that it 
had supported the scientific work through voluntary financial contributions. It stated it was pleased SPC and 
SC were able to provide relevant scientific advice, and that the stock is in a healthy state. The EU stated it 
supported the proposed recommendation regarding conducting shark stock assessments over 2 years, stating 
its understanding that it concerns the key shark species.  
297. 
Tokelau on behalf of FFA members thanked SPC for the work done on assessing Southwest Pacific 
blue shark, and noted its current status as “not overfished and not subject to overfishing”, and fully supported 
the recommendations from SC18, particularly with regard to providing more time for analysis and 
supporting research recommendations to improve future shark assessments. 
298. 
WCPFC19 noted the advice from SC 18 “that the Southwest Pacific blue shark is unlikely 
to be overfished and it is unlikely that overfishing is occurring when considered against MSY 
and depletion-based reference points”. 
299. 
WCPFC19 endorsed the proposal to allow shark assessments to occur over two years. 
 
8.1.1.2 Southwest Pacific shortfin mako shark 
300. 
The Chair noted WCPFC19-2022-22 Reference Document for Southwest Pacific shortfin mako 
shark which includes related decisions and recommendations from SC18 and TCC18 concerning the 
Southwest Pacific shortfin mako shark. She stated that the key advice from SC18 and TCC18 to WCPFC19 
includes: i) SC18 found it unable to provide stock status or trend information on Southwest Pacific shortfin 
mako shark to the Commission, as the status remains unknown; and ii) Both SC18 and TCC18 recommended 
that paragraph 1 bullet point 3 of the ‘Scientific Data to be Provided to the Commission’ should include the 
following sentence: “The estimates of annual catch for key shark species should be separated into catch 
north and south of the equator and the WCPFC Secretariat should work with CCMs to get these data 
retrospectively corrected where possible.” 
55  
  
301. 
The EU stated that it could understand the challenges involved in the Southwest Pacific shortfin 
mako shark assessment, and the need to spend a year on data analysis and reconstruction so as to avoid the 
need to do all the work in one year. It inquired regarding the next steps for this species, as the stock 
assessment has been inconclusive, and noted there was nothing scheduled for this species in the stock 
assessment schedule. The EU stated it would like to see this work advancing and being concluded as soon 
as possible. SPC acknowledged that the Southwest Pacific shortfin mako shark stock assessment was 
inconclusive, and stated that they had considered simpler approaches, such as production models. SPC noted 
the large uncertainty in the CPUE, which is not indexing the productive part of the stock. Time constraints 
meant the researchers could not talk to countries to better understand the data conflicts. SPC stated this issue 
could be addressed during the mid-term review of the shark research plan. 
302. 
New Zealand noted that the word “mako” is often mispronounced – it comes from Te Reo Māori.  
On behalf of FFA members, New Zealand stated that they appreciated the work undertaken to attempt a 
stock assessment for Southwest Pacific shortfin mako shark and supported the recommendations from SPC 
and SC18 that the stock assessment should be considered preliminary and should not be used as the basis 
for management advice. They also supported the recommendations from SC18 to encourage the practice of 
releasing shortfin mako sharks and the recommendations regarding further research, particularly with 
regards to providing more time for analysis and supporting research recommendations to improve future 
shark assessments. They also supported the recommendation from SC18 and TCC18 to separate estimates 
of annual catch of key shark species into catch north and south of the equator and to retrospectively correct 
data where possible. 
303. 
PNG on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau supported the FFA statement. They noted the challenge 
faced by scientists when trying to assess sharks, and the proposal for carrying shark assessment over two 
years to assist with the data preparation time and allow more input from the pre-assessment working group, 
and supported that approach. They expressed the hope that in the future, with expanded observer coverage 
and extended time allowed for the assessment, that an assessment of Southwest Pacific shortfin mako shark 
could be successfully concluded.  
304. 
The USA noted that the stock assessments for some key shark species are done Pacific-wide, and 
suggested appropriate language be inserted in the proposed recommendation to reflect this.  
305. 
WCPFC19 noted the advice of SC18 that the stock assessment results of Southwest 
Pacific shortfin mako sharks were preliminary and not robust enough to provide management 
advice.  
306. 
WCPFC19 agreed to amend paragraph 1 of the Scientific Data to be Provided to the 
Commission (Attachment N) relating to annual catch data for key shark species to read as 
follows: 
Estimates of annual catches 
The following estimates of catches during each calendar year shall be provided to the 
Commission for each gear type: 
 
• 
catches of bigeye tuna (Thunnus obesus), skipjack tuna (Katsuwonus pelamis), 
yellowfin tuna (Thunnus albacares), blue marlin (Makaira mazara) and black marlin 
(Makaira indica) in: 1) the WCPFC Statistical Area (see paragraph #8), and 2) the 
portion of the WCPFC Statistical Area east of the 150° meridian of west longitude; 
 
56  
  
• 
catches of albacore (Thunnus alalunga), striped marlin (Tetrapturus audax), 
swordfish (Xiphias gladius), Pacific bluefin tuna (Thunnus orientalis), thresher sharks 
(Alopias spp.), blue shark (Prionace glauca) and mako sharks (Isurus spp.) in: 1) the 
Pacific Ocean south of the Equator, 2) the Pacific Ocean north of the Equator, 3) the 
WCPFC Statistical Area north of the Equator, 4) the WCPFC Statistical Area south of 
the Equator, and 5) the portion of the WCPFC Statistical Area east of the 150° meridian 
of west longitude; and 
 
• 
silky shark, oceanic whitetip shark, thresher sharks, blue shark, mako sharks, 
porbeagle shark (south of 20°S, until biological data show this or another geographic 
limit to be appropriate), hammerhead sharks (winghead, scalloped, great, and smooth), 
and whale shark in the WCPFC Statistical Area (see paragraph #8). 
 
 
8.1.1.3 North Pacific blue shark 
307. 
ISC Vice-Chair Dr Shui-Kai Chang, on behalf of the ISC Chair, presented summaries of stock status 
of North Pacific blue shark (BSH) in 2022. The information was based on a benchmark assessment in 2022 
which used same model structure as 2017 assessment but with additional data up to 2020, applying 
Beverton-Holt stock recruit relationship (SR) rather than low fecundity SR, and adopting the model 
ensemble approach. The results show that the SSB declined from the mid-1970s to 1990 and has since 
increased and stabilized around 100,000 t through the 2000s. The median estimates of current SSB are about 
SSBMSY. Stock status reported in relation to MSY-based reference points that: median female SSB in 2020 
was estimated to be 1.170 of SSBMSY (80th percentile, 0.570 - 1.776) and is likely (63.5% probability) not in 
an overfished condition; recent annual F (F2017-2019) is estimated to be below FMSY and overfishing of the 
stock is very likely (91.9% probability) not occurring; and the base case model results show that there is a 
61.9% joint probability that stock is not in an overfished condition and that overfishing is not occurring. 
Future projections in three of the four harvest scenarios: Fcurrent (2017-2019), Fcurrent+20%, and Fcurrent–20% 
showed that median BSH SSB will likely increase and remain above SSBMSY in the next ten years; the FMSY 
harvest scenario led to a decrease in median SSB to below SSBMSY. There remain some uncertainties in the 
assessment, and therefore continued improvements in the monitoring of BSH catches and continued research 
into the biology, ecology, and spatial structure of BSH are recommended. SC18 noted that the current 
assessment is an improvement over the previous assessment and supports the model ensemble approach 
taken in the 2022 stock assessment as a more comprehensive way of characterizing structural uncertainty in 
stock status. However, SC18 noted that the model ensemble approach did not consider some key 
uncertainties and so recommended a more thorough use of the approach to better represent uncertainty for 
future assessments. SC18 also noted that recent estimated recruitment was below the average level, and that 
if these low recruitments persist into the future, then the projection results could be overly optimistic. 
308. 
Palau stated on behalf of FFA members that they were pleased to note the improved status of blue 
shark in the North Pacific as not being overfished and not subject to overfishing. They supported the 
recommendations from SC18 for a more thorough use of the model ensemble approach to better represent 
uncertainty for future assessments, and with regard to providing more time for analysis and supporting 
research recommendations to improve future shark assessments.  
309. 
WCPFC19 endorsed the advice of SC18 that North Pacific blue shark is not in an 
overfished condition and that overfishing is not occurring relative to MSY based reference points 
(WCPFC19-2022-23, paragraph 2).  
57  
  
8.1.2 
Review of CMM for Sharks (CMM 2019-04) 
310. 
The Chair noted that WCPFC19-2022-24 Reference Document for the review of CMM for Sharks 
(CMM 2019-04) includes recommendations from SC18 and TCC18 of relevance to the discussion in support 
of the review of CMM 2019-04 on sharks. The Chair also noted that the USA and Canada introduced a 
proposal under Agenda Item 4: WCPFC19-2022-DP01 Proposed Revisions to the CMM for Sharks. 
311. 
Tokelau on behalf of FFA members thanked the USA and Canada for the proposal and the 
completion of the CMM 2013-06 assessment, which FFA members stated they considered to be thorough, 
providing ample consideration of the potential impacts on SIDS, including that implementation of the new 
provisions outlined would not come into effect until 1 January 2024, allowing time for CCMs to implement 
them. They stated that this is an important issue for FFA members, and that the use of wire traces and shark 
lines by longline vessels operating within FFA members’ waters is already prohibited through FFA’s 
Harmonised Minimum Terms and Conditions, and all sharks landed by all vessels licensed to fish within 
FFA members' waters and those flagged to FFA require all fins to be naturally attached, or finning is 
managed through alternative measures. However, they queried how the Commission will monitor the clause 
on trailing gear as proposed, and suggested other wording changes. They supported the recommendations 
from SC18 and TCC18, stating that the proposed amendments as necessary, particularly given concerns 
with regards to the depleted stock status for oceanic whitetip and silky sharks and the lack of any apparent 
alternative effective management options. They stated that they consider the ban on wire trace and shark 
lines as a critical step to reduce mortality of oceanic whitetip sharks, and supported the proposal of the USA 
and Canada. FFA members noted that the measure had yet to be assessed in the CMR process. They noted 
it is listed in Attachment S “List of Obligations to be Reviewed in the 2022 Draft Compliance Monitoring 
Report (Covering 2021 Activities)” of the WCPFC18 Report, and while noting TCC18’s recommendation 
that the Commission consider adopting the same or a very similar list of obligations for review in both the 
2022 and 2023 draft CMRs (dCMR), they suggested prioritising this measure for CMR assessment in 2023.  
312. 
New Caledonia thanked the USA for its proposal, and thanked FFA members for their support. New 
Caledonia stated it banned all shark fishing in 2013, and that its waters formed one of the biggest marine 
sanctuaries in the world. New Caledonia noted that sharks have a crucial role in offshore ecosystems, and 
are also important both socially and culturally. For all these reasons New Caledonia has decided to fully 
protect sharks, and stated it supports the USA’s proposal. 
313. 
French Polynesia stated that it agreed with New Caledonia regarding the important cultural and 
biological roles of sharks and strongly supported the proposal, including the language regarding cutting the 
branch line as close as possible to the shark.  
314. 
The EU referenced the finning prohibition, and noted that in the previous CMM there were three 
options for implementation of a finning ban, with information to be provided to TCC to allow for evaluation 
of the CMM’s effectiveness. The EU stated it was time to look into this and ensure that information is made 
available to TCC19 to assist on deliberations on this important matter. The EU also stated that the existing 
CMM is good and supported the intent of improving and strengthening it, while suggesting the need for 
some fine tuning. 
315. 
RMI fully supported adoption of the measure.  
316. 
In the ensuing discussion some CCMs raised concerns regarding the deadlines contained in the 
proposal; the inclusion of a prohibition on “carrying” wire traces, in addition to their use, suggesting this 
could restrict vessel movements; and inclusion of “billfish” in the CMM along with sharks. Other CCMs 
noted the need to strengthen and not roll back any elements of the existing CMM; noted the need for 
compatibility with FFA measures, and supported the inclusion of “billfish”; and supported a prohibition on 
58  
  
carrying wire traces, noting that low observer coverage made it difficult to monitor compliance with a 
prohibition on their use.  
317. 
Following further consideration CCMs agreed to the revised CMM. The EU noted that in supporting 
the proposal it did so with the understanding that this set no precedent for extending the scope of the measure 
beyond what was agreed without specific and robust scientific advice.  
318. 
WCPFC19 adopted CMM 2022-04 Conservation and Management Measure for Sharks 
(Attachment O).  
 
8.2 
Seabird Mitigation 
8.2.1 
Review of CMM 2018-03 
319. 
The Chair noted that recommendations from SC18 and TCC18 are contained in reference paper 
WCPFC19-2022-25 Reference document for Agenda 8.2 – 8.4 on ecosystem and bycatch mitigation 
320. 
Tonga, on behalf of FFA members noted the decline in albatross and petrel populations globally, as 
well as within the WCPFC area which; they stated that this, coupled with the lack of monitoring in the 
longline fishery, gave them significant cause for concern. FFA members noted the recommendations from 
SC18 to conduct a review of the current seabird mitigation measure (CMM 2018-03) against ACAP Best 
Practices within the next two years, with particular attention to bycatch mitigation and improved monitoring.  
321. 
New Zealand expressed its deep concern about the threat to many seabird species, particularly 
albatrosses and petrels, from bycatch in longline fisheries in the WCPFC area, noting that recent science 
shows that one of the most threatened species the Antipodean albatross continues to decline at a rate of 5% 
per annum, and faces imminent extinction unless bycatch is addressed in those high-risk areas where there 
is overlap between tuna longline fishing and the foraging of these birds. SC18 recommended that the 
Commission conduct a review of the current seabird mitigation measure (CMM 2018-03) during 2023-2024 
in order to evaluate effective bycatch mitigations. New Zealand stated that this was a high priority and that 
there is scope to strengthen the CMM to ensure that effective seabird mitigation methods are required and 
used in the Convention Area.  New Zealand proposed, for example: i) ensuring there are appropriately strong 
seabird mitigations in the areas in both the southern and northern hemispheres within the core range of the 
antipodean albatross; ii) strengthening and improving the requirements for line weighting and tori line 
specifications; iii) eliminating ineffective mitigation options from the measure, e.g., blue-dyed bait, streamer 
less tori lines, and offal discharge; and iv) improving monitoring of the longline fishery in order to improve 
implementation of seabird mitigations. New Zealand stated it is prepared to lead this work in close 
collaboration with others. It also drew attention to a one page “flyer” for fishing vessels that New Zealand 
has posted on the WCPFC website for this meeting, which has been translated into multiple languages.  New 
Zealand stated it is tracking albatrosses so that there is an alert when a seabird is captured.  Vessels are 
required to keep the tracker and notify the vessel owner. 
322. 
EU stated that it supported these recommendations, and thanked New Zealand for its suggestions, 
noting its support for evaluating the effectiveness of CMMs that are being implemented. It supported the 
suggestions from New Zealand and commended its efforts to strengthen conservation of these species. 
323. 
Australia welcomed New Zealand’s intervention and shared the concerns expressed, and stated it 
looked forward to working together. 
59  
  
324. 
The USA stated it supported a commitment from WCPFC19 to review the CMM in 2023-2024. The 
USA noted that it is conducting ongoing research and expressed the hope that the work would prove useful 
when complete.  
325. 
New Caledonia supported New Zealand’s intervention, and stated that it is working with its longline 
fisheries to begin deployment of tori lines on its first boats in 2023, and seeking to deploy them across its 
entire fleet in 2024. 
326. 
ACAP stated that it fully supported the recommendation for the review and updating of the CMM 
on seabirds. ACAP was  pleased to hear the support expressed by New Zealand and other delegations. It 
noted that at SC18 ACAP had presented a paper providing a thorough update on ACAP’s most recent best 
practice advice on seabird bycatch mitigation, and new ACAP guidelines.  . ACAP stated it would be happy 
to take part in the work to update and revise CMM 2018-03 based on this most recent advice. 
327. 
Birdlife International stated its thanks to New Zealand for taking the lead to ensure seabird bycatch 
mitigation measures are implemented. It acknowledged there are many issues to work through, and stated it 
did not wish to detract attention from those. It welcomed the review of seabird bycatch mitigation, and noted 
it has extensive experience in working with vessels on practical measures to help address seabird bycatch. 
328. 
WCPFC19 noted a global decline in specific Agreement on the Conservation of 
Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP) seabird population trends, which are vulnerable to threats posed 
by longline fisheries in the WCPO and the importance of seabird bycatch mitigation measures. 
329. 
WCPFC19 agreed to conduct review of the current seabird mitigation measure (CMM 
2018-03 Conservation and Management Measure to mitigate the impact of fishing for highly 
migratory fish stocks on seabirds) in 2023 or 2024 whereby new bycatch mitigation studies 
would be evaluated with respect to bycatch mitigation effectiveness and compared against 
current ACAP Best Practices.  
 
8.3 
Graphics for Best Practices for Safe Handling and Release of Cetaceans 
330. 
The Chair stated that the graphics for best practices for safe handling and release of cetaceans are 
contained in Attachment 1 of WCPFC19-2022-25 Reference document for Agenda 8.2 – 8.4 on ecosystem 
and bycatch mitigation, and that SC18 and TCC18 recommended they be adopted. 
331. 
WCPFC19 adopted the Graphics for Best Practices for the Safe Handling and Release of 
Cetaceans. (Attachment P) 
 
8.4 
Ecosystem and Bycatch Mitigation 
8.4.1 
Ecosystem and climate indicators 
332. 
Dr Steven Hare (SPC-OFP) presented WCPFC19-2022-IP02 2021 Fishery overview and status of 
stocks, restricted to the Ecosystem and Climate Indicators section. At SC18, a set of candidate ecosystem 
and climate indicators was presented for consideration for adoption (WCPFC-SC18-2022-EB-WP-01). In 
particular, “SC18 recommended that available information and updates on the impacts of climate change be 
included or combined with status of stocks reporting.” Further, SC18 recommended that ecosystem and 
bycatch indicators be presented annually to the SC as a standing agenda item, and the identification of their 
implications and subsequent triggers be developed. Examples of various types of indicators developed by 
60  
  
the Scientific Services Provider were provided. Several climate indices, characterizing environmental 
variability in the central and western Pacific over the past 20 years were illustrated. Observer data were used 
as the basis to estimate trends in gear-specific shark and billfish catch. Both shark and billfish catch are two 
orders of magnitude higher in the longline fishery than the purse seine fishery. The El Niño Southern 
Oscillation is a major driver of oceanic conditions in the tropical Pacific and its impact on the purse seine 
fishery has long been recognized. The spatial extent, and centre of activity, can vary by thousands of 
kilometres between years, particularly when comparing El Niño and La Niña events. The WCPO has 
experienced two consecutive years of La Niña conditions and the current forecast is for a third consecutive 
year. Recent work by the Scientific Services Provider has considered the likely impact on target tuna stocks 
of the WCPO. The three tropical tunas are projected to decrease in biomass by 15%-38%, with the greatest 
decline estimated for skipjack. Further, it is predicted that distribution of the three tropical tunas will shift 
to the east, with large biomass declines, especially for skipjack, in the western part of their distribution and 
a net increase in biomass in the EPO. 
333. 
Niue on behalf of FFA members noted the suite of ecosystem and climate indicators proposed by 
the Scientific Services Provider and supported the development of a project to evaluate and potentially adopt 
these indicators. They stated that Pacific leaders have repeatedly highlighted the particular importance of 
addressing climate change impacts to the region, and stated that FFA members support the recommendations 
of SC18 to mainstream this important work into the SC processes and reporting as a standing agenda item. In 
further strengthening climate change work and discussions at WCPFC, FFA members supported the 
proposal by the USA (in WCPFC19-2022-DP14) to add climate change as a standing item at NC and 
TCC.  In addition, FFA members encouraged WCPFC to continue to actively consider how climate change 
can be incorporated into its work, and along that line, recommended that climate change be a standing 
agenda item at the annual Commission meeting. FFA members stated they were pleased to co-sponsor the 
USA’s discussion paper on climate change, especially as it has added the FFA suggestion that climate 
change be added as a standing agenda item for the annual Commission meeting. 
334. 
Japan thanked SPC for the informative presentation, and stated it is very important to take into 
account climate change factors when considering harvest strategies and other management measures for 
tuna stocks. It stated that in 2022 the catch of skipjack in coastal and offshore areas of Japan had been very 
poor (a decrease of 20% from the 2021 level, which was already low). Japan stated that some fishers had 
encountered financial difficulties in continuing this fishery, particularly in coastal areas. It noted the need 
to maintain a stable level of tropical tuna stocks to ensure a stable catch. Japan stated it was not alone in 
facing this problem, and referenced some tropical purse seine fisheries that have had trouble finding good 
fish schools. Japan stated that it has good technology to find and catch fish, but fishing efficiency has 
declined. Japan stated that coastal states such as itself have very significant coastal and offshore fisheries, 
and noted the need to maintain fisheries in a stable condition, as they would otherwise lose important fishing 
industries. For this reason, it stated it is important to promote study of climate change, and having this as a 
standing agenda item is important. Japan stated that it was eager to address these issues in the context of a 
discussion of the skipjack harvest strategies. Japan stated it would support continuing the work.  
335. 
Tuvalu inquired if it was correct that the longline shark catch is some 1.5 to 2 million individuals 
per year. SPC affirmed that is correct, compared to the purse seine bycatch of 50,000-100,000 individuals 
(as addressed in WCPFC19-2022-IP02, p. 11). Tuvalu stated that this makes a strong case for the need for 
bycatch mitigation in the longline fishery. 
336. 
New Caledonia observed that climate change is affecting the region’s fishery, and that as islands 
cannot be moved, coastal fisheries in the western Pacific will be most impacted. It supported both the work 
and the FFA statement. 
61  
  
337. 
New Zealand voiced support for SPC to conduct this analysis, and stated that it has experienced 
declines in catch of skipjack in its waters, and welcomed the analysis of the change in stock distribution. 
338. 
The EU thanked SPC for the work and supported its continuation. It also supported the inclusion of 
a standing agenda item on ecosystem and climate in all Commission meetings, noting it is a planetary issue 
of concern to everyone. It voiced the need to take this duly into consideration. Regarding Tuvalu’s comment, 
it stated that it would help in future presentations to discriminate between protected and commercial sharks, 
as this would be more informative. SPC stated the data was for sharks taken by the commercial longline 
fishery, and not artisanal fishing. The EU clarified it was referring to species that are considered commercial 
species, as against some with retention bans. SPC stated that the data could likely be separated.  
339. 
Indonesia agreed on the growing concern regarding climate change impacts. It stated that under the 
WPEA-SM project, the three participating countries (Indonesia, the Philippines and Vietnam) had studied 
climate change impacts. Indonesia stated that that at the national level it is very hard to find experts to help 
assess climate change impacts related to tuna fisheries, and remarked on the need for more capacity building 
to understand future climate change impacts on fisheries. Indonesia also remarked on recent increased 
archipelagic waters catch of South Pacific albacore, caused by more fish entering the archipelagic waters, 
possibly as a result of climate change. 
340. 
RMI thanked SPC and stated that consideration of climate change was critical to ensure CCMs keep 
abreast of climate change developments, and how they may impact the objectives and mission of the 
Commission. RMI supported the comments by Niue and looked forward to SPC’s continuing work on this. 
341. 
French Polynesia thanked SPC, and joined other CCMs in stating that such studies are very 
important. 
342. 
WCPFC19 endorsed the following recommendations of SC18 relating to climate change:  
i 
SC18 recommended making “Ecosystem and Climate Indicators” a standing 
agenda item of the Ecosystem and Bycatch Mitigation Theme session. This would 
provide a mechanism for the Scientific Committee to annually consider adopting 
candidate indicators presented to the Committee but also review and respond to 
existing trends/triggers identified in adopted indicators.  
ii 
SC18 recommended the development and testing of “Ecosystem and Climate 
Indicators” as a project of the Scientific Committee. This would provide a 
mechanism for the Scientific Committee to easily track its progress towards 
evaluating and adopting candidate indicators. 
iii 
SC18 recommended that available information and updates on the impacts of 
climate change be included or combined with status of stocks reporting. 
343. 
Recognizing the urgency of developing a comprehensive approach to understanding and 
addressing the impacts of climate change on highly migratory fish stocks in the Convention Area, 
and any related impacts on the economies of CCMs and food security and the livelihoods of their 
people, in particular Small Island Developing States (SIDS) and Participating Territories, the 
Commission agrees to include Climate Change as a standing agenda item and to prioritize 
discussion of how best to incorporate climate change information and analyses in its work, as 
well as the work of TCC and the NC. 
62  
  
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 9  —  COMPLIANCE MONITORING SCHEME  
344. 
The Chair stated that the Commission would consider the outcomes of the work of the CMS-IWG 
that was tasked to progress the various work streams under the “Future Work” component of CMM 2021-
03 on the WCPFC CMS. She stated that the working group was chaired by the TCC-Vice Chair, Ms Emily 
Crigler (USA). As agreed by the Commission at WCPFC18, a 2022 CMR (covering activities for 2021) was 
not considered by TCC18, and thus would not be considered at WCPFC19; she noted it was scheduled for 
consideration (together with the 2023 CMR covering 2022 activities) by TCC19 and WCPFC20. 
9.1 
CMS-IWG Workplan to Progress the CMS Future Work Included in Section IX of CMM 
2021-03 Compliance Monitoring Scheme 
345. 
The Chair stated that the reference papers included WCPFC19-2022-26 Reference document on 
TCC18 recommendations for Agenda Item 9 CMS; WCPFC19-2022-27 – a side by side comparison by the 
Secretariat of draft audit points and the Secretariat’s dCMR criteria; and WCPFC19-2022-IP18 
Secretariat’s preliminary assessment of its anticipated work commitments to support work of TCC in 2023 
and 2024.  
346. 
The TCC Vice-Chair provided an update on the work of the CMS-IWG. She expressed gratitude to 
the leads of the CMS workstreams for their time and dedication, and to the Secretariat (in particular the 
Compliance Manager) for support. She noted the CMS-IWG workplan contained the items that the 
Commission had tasked itself to undertake. She stated that the RBAF work stream was led by Heather Ward, 
and the proposed framework was used when considering the elements to be evaluated at WCPFC18. She 
noted that CCMs held additional useful conversations at TCC18, and stated that separate presentations 
would be made by the leads for the RBAF (under Agenda Item 9.1.1) and audit points (under Agenda Item 
9.1.2). She noted that the Secretariat had worked on improvements to the CCFS, and that this would be 
further addressed in 2023. She noted that the issue of observer participation in the CMR process was 
discussed at TCC18, and that this would be discussed under Agenda Item 9.1.3. She noted that the goal in 
2022 for development of corrective actions was to secure a lead for that work (discussed under Agenda Item 
9.1.4). The process to review the aggregate summary tables was discussed under Agenda Item 9.1.5.  
347. 
Cook Islands on behalf of FFA members thanked the Chair of the CMS-IWG for her work in 
coordinating the various CMS work streams and noted that there might be a need to review the CMS 
workplan based on the discussions at WCPFC19. 
348. 
Tuvalu on behalf of PNA and Tokelau stated that FFA members had previously said they would 
consider the issue of observer participation once the revised CMS measure was working as intended. They 
noted that while there had been substantial progress in improving the CMS, the CMS measure was still far 
from working as intended. They stated that in particular the imbalance in observer coverage between the 
purse seine and longline fisheries results in a deeply flawed base of information for the CMR, which 
completely undermines the fairness of those elements of the CMS that rely on observer data. For this reason, 
great caution is needed to ensure that this basic unfairness is not compounded by opening up the prospect 
of this flawed information being misused or misinterpreted outside the CMR. In addition, much of the 
information used in the CMR is confidential. For these reasons, PNA and Tokelau suggested deleting the 
work on observer participation from the workplan and replacing it with “work on fixing the effect of the 
current imbalance and bias in the CMS”. 
349. 
RMI supported the statement by Tuvalu, and on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau noted that the 
revised workplan, which they stated is a very thorough and useful document, which is important because of 
63  
  
the large volume of work in the workplan. PNA and Tokelau requested two changes: delete Priority 5 on 
page 5 on opening the CMS process to observers. PNA and Tokelau stated they did not support that step at 
this point, and in the light of other priorities requested that it be deleted and the following priority included: 
“Address the impact of the imbalance in observer information on the CMS.” They stated their view that this 
is important for two reasons: the imbalance substantially reduces the value of the CMS and therefore the 
priority that can be attached to it, and it constrains the progress that can be made in strengthening the CMS 
in areas such as consideration of the aggregate tables and corrective actions. They suggested scheduling 
work on that task in 2023 so that the outcomes can be used in the process of revising the CMS CMM.   
350. 
The Chair noted that there appeared to be no concerns with the seven TCC recommendation in 
paragraph 2 of WCPFC19-2022-16.  The matter of observer participation in the CMS was further considered 
under Agenda 9.1.3.   
351. 
WCPFC19 endorsed the following recommendations of TCC18 on the Compliance 
Monitoring Scheme Future Work Components (WCPFC19-2022-16, paragraph 2). 
i 
TCC18 noted the imbalance between the information available for monitoring 
compliance between the longline and purse seine fisheries and recommended that 
the Commission recognise the need to address this imbalance.  
ii 
TCC18 noted that compliance with some obligations cannot be independently 
verified from available data sources.  TCC18 recommended that WCPFC19 task 
the Secretariat to develop a paper, which identifies those obligations for which 
there is a lack of independently verifiable data, as well as potential sources of data 
that could provide independent verification of those obligations, for review by 
TCC19.  
iii 
TCC18 recommended that the Commission prioritize the development of 
additional data collection mechanisms for some obligations to allow for more 
timely and verifiable data to feed into the CMR process. TCC18 noted in 
particular there is ongoing work related to ER&EM and transhipment reporting 
that will allow for more verifiable data to feed into the CMR process.  
iv 
TCC18 noted that some quantitative limits and baselines for some CMMs are not 
easily accessible to CCMs.  TCC18 recommended that WCPFC19 task the 
Secretariat to publish tables of CCM’s limits and baselines for all relevant CMMs, 
and notes on their sources. 
v 
TCC18 noted that greater clarity about the basis for determining applicability of 
obligations may assist CCMs with their annual reporting. TCC18 recommended 
that WCPFC19 task the Secretariat to update and develop additional guidelines to 
support determining the applicability of obligations for review by TCC19.  TCC18 
recommended that once the applicability has been reviewed by TCC, it is 
integrated and held on file in the Annual Report Part 2 reporting system.  
vi 
TCC18 noted that additional guidance on reporting statements of implementation 
may assist CCMs with their annual reporting. TCC18 recommended that 
64  
  
WCPFC19 task the Secretariat to update and develop additional guidelines to 
support CCMs reporting of statements of implementation for review by TCC19.  
vii 
TCC18 recommended to WCPFC19 that it task the Secretariat to maintain the 
information relevant to the Risk Based Assessment Framework, a list of all 
binding obligations, audit points, data sources, compliance history and other 
information which supports the dCMR in one place associated with information 
related to the Compliance Monitoring Scheme and Conservation and Management 
Measures. 
 
9.1.1 
Develop Audit points 
352. 
The CMS-IWG Audit Point Lead Ms. Rhea Moss-Christian (RMI) reviewed progress in developing 
audit points for the CMS. She stated that TCC considered 60 draft audit points and agreed to 59 of these and 
forwarded them to the Commission for adoption, as addressed in WCPFC19-2022-26 Reference Paper for 
TCC18 Recommendations for Agenda 9 Compliance Monitoring Scheme. TCC18 tasked the CMS-IWG to 
work on another 100 or so audit points in the runup to WCPFC19. Feedback was received from the IWG 
participants through November. She noted the progress made at WCPFC19, as outlined in WCPFC19-2022-
CMS_AP_rev1 Recommended Audit points for the WCPFC CMS, and described the issues that required 
further work.   
353. 
The USA acknowledged the work undertaken by CMS-IWG lead on audit points, and stated the 
hope that the work could be completed in 2023as it would be very helpful in the CMR process. 
354. 
The EU supported the proposed way forward, and echoed the thanks for the audit point work.  The 
EU also inquired if the agreed audit points would apply to the 2023 dCMR, and suggested for consistency 
and in line with common practice for all Commission’s decisions to avoid retroactive application and that 
they be applied starting in the 2023 fishing season (and thus with the 2024 dCMR).  
355. 
The Compliance Manager stated that WCPFC19-2022-33 Information note on the status of the 
dCMR prepared by the Secretariat in 2022 for review at TCC19 in 2023 outlines a number of potential issues 
in the current dCMR, and recommended that it be considered by CCMs. Referring to WCPFC19-2022-27 
Side by side comparison of draft Audit Points and Secretariat dCMR criteria, she stated that it appeared 
feasible to apply the audit points to the 2022 dCMR (for 2021 activities).  
356. 
Tokelau, also on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau, stated that this was part of the work to reform the 
CMS measure. They thanked the CMS-IWG lead on audit points for the work and supported applying the 
adopted audit points to the 2022 dCMR and the 2023 compliance assessment review for 2022 fishing 
activities. They noted that the FAC was looking at a process to build in additional support to the Secretariat 
to assist with some work in 2023.  
357. 
Australia supported applying the audit points for both the 2022 and 2023 dCMRs.  
358. 
The EU stated that CCMs’ reports for the year 2021 fishing activities had already been submitted, 
but that these necessarily did not use the criteria adopted at WCPFC19. The EU suggested applying the audit 
points retroactively to the 2021 activities would be inconsistent with the WCPFC’s normal practices.  
359. 
Chinese Taipei supported the concept that these be used, but stated that its intent was not to use 
them for 2021 activities. As the Secretariat has already reviewed the 2021 activities, Chinese Taipei 
65  
  
proposed that they be used beginning with 2022 activities to reduce the workload for both the Secretariat 
and CCMs. 
360. 
New Zealand stated it was confused by the conversation, noting audit points do not change the 
obligations that exist, just clarify what is required, and stated it was unclear why the agreed audit points 
could not be used for the 2022 CMR process.. New Zealand noted that the Secretariat had confirmed that 
the agreed audit points could be applied to both 2022 and 2023 CMRs.  
361. 
The EU stated it had a different understanding to New Zealand, and indicated that the Secretariat 
had already done the assessment and would be obliged to repeat the exercise, resulting in additional 
workload; alternatively, CCMs would possibly have to revisit what they reported to ensure their reporting 
is consistent with the new audit points.  
362. 
Cook Islands referenced CMM 2021-03 paragraph (e) which states “In 2023, TCC19 shall consider 
a CMR that assesses CCMs’ compliance over the previous 2-year reporting period (RY2021 and RY2022) 
using the agreed audit point and risk-based assessment framework adopted by WCPFC19”. 
363. 
The Compliance Manager again referenced WCPFC19-2022-33, which provides information on 
the current status of the dCMR just before WCPFC19. She stated a decision on the process that TCC will 
be using for the 2021 and 2022 reporting years should consider the number of issues, the fact that a number 
of CCMs had not previously engaged in the CMR process for 2021 data, and that some may want the 
opportunity to supplement their responses. She noted the need for due process that would allow for TCC’s 
consideration of the potential issues that may arise. She noted the need to clarify how this process will be 
managed through 2023 in the leadup to TCC19. 
364. 
Chinese Taipei stated it was OK with using the audit points to cover 2021 activities, but that there 
was a need to ensure all CCMs had adequate time to provide any supplement information based on new 
audit points. 
365. 
WCPFC19 expressed its sincere appreciation to the Lead of the CMS-IWG work on 
Audit Points, Rhea Moss-Christian, for her hard work in developing Audit Points. 
366. 
WCPFC adopted the audit points for the WCPFC Compliance Monitoring Scheme 
(CMS)(Attachment Q) and the audit point checklist for proposed new or amended obligations   
(Attachment R). WCPFC19 agreed to prioritize work on the remaining audit points in 2023. 
367. 
WCPFC19 noted that the Commission at WCPFC18 had agreed in adopting CMM 2021-
03 that TCC19, in 2023, shall consider a CMR that assesses CCMs’ compliance over the previous 
2-year reporting period (RY2021 and RY2022).  WCPFC19 agreed that the adopted Audit Points 
will apply to the 2022 dCMR (covering 2021 reporting) and the 2023 dCMR (covering 2022 
reporting). 
 
9.1.2 
Develop Risk-based Assessment Framework 
368. 
The CMS-IWG RBAF Lead Ms. Heather Ward (New Zealand) reiterated her appreciation to CCMs 
for their contributions and thanked the WCPFC Secretariat and CMS IWG Chair. She noted the very useful 
discussion at TCC18 that resulted in the RBAF being recommended to the Commission as to tool to help 
guide the selection of future lists of obligations for the CMR Review. The RBAF Lead reviewed the purpose 
of the work, emphasising that the RBAF would not automatically produce an annual list of obligations or 
66  
  
determine a multi-year schedule of obligations for assessment – that is a separate process.  The RBAF 
provides a common language to collectively discuss which obligations pose the highest risk, either because 
of the likelihood of non-compliance or because of the consequence of non-compliance or the combination 
of both.  Based on that analysis, we can determine which high-risk obligations deserve greater or more 
regular scrutiny in the CMS process and, conversely, which low-risk obligations can be treated differently.  
In addition, CCMs could also consider whether certain obligations (such as quantitative limits) should be 
“baked in” to the annual list and whether certain implementation obligations which are “kept on file” should 
still be regularly assessed.   As a tool to help CCMs collectively prioritise obligations for assessment, the 
RBAF would complement audit points in providing clarity and transparency to the compliance monitoring 
process. 
369. 
Tuvalu on behalf of FFA thanked the RBAF lead for her hard work over the 2-year period to 
progress the RBAF to this point. They stated that the RBAF should help streamline the CMS and it should 
help CCMs to select obligations, where non-compliance poses the greatest risk. FFA members supported 
adopting the RBAF recommended by TCC18 in order to help prioritize the list of obligations to be assessed 
under the CMS in the coming years. They encouraged CCMs to use the framework in their consideration of 
the list of obligations to be assessed in advance of the discussion of a list of obligations at TCC19 and stated 
FFA members would do the same.   
370. 
The EU thanked the RBAF lead for her hard work. The EU noted that FFA had considered this a 
major element of the CMS, and observed that the CMR had been discontinued in part because of the absence 
of the RBAF, and stated that the initial intent was to avoid extensive negotiation on the list of obligations 
each year. Prior to this all CCMs had their own assessment framework. The EU stated that unfortunately the 
RBAF process had not achieved what was initially intended. The EU stated its hope that the results did not 
lead to a lot of additional work. 
371. 
Australia thanked New Zealand for the work, which would provide a platform to better assess what 
obligations pose a risk, and the annual review process allows for streamlining the CMS process. It stated 
that the Secretariat had indicated there are ways to make the RBAF framework available, and stated its hope 
it could be used to expedite and streamline the CMS work in the future. 
372. 
Tokelau, also on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau thanked both the RBAF and Audit Point Leads for 
their work.  They stated that progress in these two important areas as an important contribution to reforming 
the CMS. They supported the TCC recommendation and the FFA statement on the RBAF that view it as a 
useful tool for considering future lists of obligations to review during the CMR process. They also noted 
that because of the imbalance and bias in the monitoring coverage there may be some obligations that cannot 
be fairly assessed in the CMR process; in that case, these obligations would need to be excluded from the 
CMR. 
373. 
WCPFC19 expressed its sincere appreciation to the Lead of the CMS-IWG work on the 
Risk Based Assessment Framework (RBAF), Heather Ward, for her hard work developing a 
RBAF. The Commission endorsed the RBAF as a useful tool that CCMs may use to guide their 
consideration of future lists of obligations to review during the Compliance Monitoring Report 
Review. 
 
9.1.3 
Develop Guidelines for Observer participation 
374. 
The TCC Vice-Chair stated that she developed a paper with the Secretariat (TCC18-2022-12) on 
observer participation, based on a TCC17 recommendation. That paper was reviewed at TCC18 (TCC18 
Summary Report, paras. 64-84), but there was no agreement at TCC on the paper’s recommendations. She 
67  
  
noted that based on the comments received at TCC18 it appeared some members did not want to hold further 
discussions on observer participation until data are improved, and there is more balance in the number of 
obligations in longline and purse seine measures. She noted comments made by CCMs at WPCFC19 
regarding this issue under Agenda Item 9.1, and stated she had no recommendations on how to progress the 
discussion.  
375. 
The USA thanked the TCC Vice-Chair and the Secretariat for their work on this issue, and observed 
that the difference of opinion was not a new one. The USA noted that questions had been raised related to 
the measures the Commission had adopted for various fleets, and stated that differences in the required level 
of monitoring were being incorrectly assigned to the CMS. It stated that a failure by the Commission to 
adopt a balanced range of measures was not a flaw of the CMS. The USA stated it would work with other 
CCMs to provide that greater balance, but that characterizing the situation as a flaw of the CMS and using 
that as a reason for not increasing transparency, in the form of increased observer participation was 
misplaced. The USA also commented that CCMs had implied there were improprieties with respect to 
confidentiality or sharing of information. The USA stated it was unaware of any such issues in recent years, 
and stated that discussions had been held at TCC regarding measures that could be adopted to reduce the 
potential for such problems. It also noted that many CCM delegations already include outside stakeholders 
who can participate in the CMR process. The USA emphasised that the obligation to include observers had 
been agreed to by the Commission, and is included in the CMM. The USA observed that the Commission 
was overdue in taking action, noting that good progress had been made on the other elements, and expressed 
the hope that the Commission could make progress on this in 2023. 
376. 
The EU stated that as indicated by the USA, participation of observers in all session of the 
Commission and subsidiary bodies is necessary to ensure transparency, and stated it was a requirement 
under the Convention. The EU stated that lengthy discussions on the issue in the past had suggested the that 
data confidentiality was the key problem, and at TCC18 it seemed some progress had been made on that 
issue. It noted the Secretariat prepared a very informative paper (TCC18-2022-12) showing that most of the 
data are already available in the public domain, meaning the risk from public disclosure is very low. The 
EU stated that CCMs had subsequently identified another area that seemed to be problematic, relating to the 
imbalance in observer reporting rates that result in a huge amount of data for purse seine fisheries, and less 
for the longline fleet. The EU stated that that there was scope to address that, and that the Commission could 
undertake to do so, but instead was simply not following up on the issue. The EU stated that when FFA 
members initially discussed the CMR review, three strands of work were to be undertaken, but one of these 
related to observer participation had been abandoned. The EU urged FFA members to reconsider, and 
follow-up on their commitment in this important issue. 
377. 
Solomon Islands, on behalf of FFA members, stated that their views on this issue were captured in 
the TCC18 recommendations. They stated they would be prepared to consider the issue of observer 
participation in the CMS again when the current unfairness in the CMS is addressed. CMM 2021-03 on 
CMS paragraph 3 states that the implementation of the CMS and its associated processes shall be conducted 
in accordance with the principles of: effectiveness, efficiency, fairness and cooperation towards compliance. 
They stated that, as they had consistently stated, the CMS is flawed because of the imbalance between the 
information available for monitoring compliance between the longline and purse seine fisheries, which calls 
to question the principle of fairness required by the CMS measure. They stated that this was a consistent 
issue for FFA members for several years and one that the Commission needed to fix before considering the 
issue of observer participation. FFA members stated that a related issue is the fact that the dCMR raises 
potential compliance issues against CCMs, and that the classification of the dCMR as non-public domain 
data is aligned with the notion of “due process”, which needs to ensure that the interests of those identified 
in the dCMR are protected through to the Commission process that determines whether there has been 
compliance (or non-compliance) with specific obligations. FFA members stated they supported 
transparency and inclusivity but that the scheme and the process must be fair to all. They closed by 
68  
  
reiterating that they would be prepared to consider the issue of observer participation when the current 
unfairness in the CMS is addressed. 
378. 
Korea stated it attaches much importance to transparency, and had seen a number of examples of 
meaningful contributions from observers, and anticipated further contributions. It supported participation 
by observers in principle provided no vessel-level information is discussed. Korea stated it looked forward 
to further discussions in 2023. 
379. 
Tuvalu on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau stated they do not support opening the CMR process to 
observers because the CMS process remains deeply unfair and because of the confidentiality of much of the 
information used in the CMR.  They stated that they understand that the cause of these flaws is outside the 
CMS, but stated it deeply affects the fairness of the CMS outcomes, which means that great caution is 
needed to ensure that this basic unfairness is not compounded by opening up the prospect of this flawed 
information to being misused or misinterpreted outside the CMR. For these reasons, PNA and Tokelau stated 
they do not support opening the CMS process to observers. They stated they would be prepared to look at 
the issue again when the imbalance is fixed.  They welcomed CCMs working towards balancing the 
measures, such as adoption of the FFA’s ER proposal, to address the imbalance, rather than the circular 
argument they continue to have regarding the CMS.   
380. 
PNG also on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau, stated that, as indicated at TCC18, they consider that 
much of the information used in the CMR is non-public domain data and should be kept confidential. They 
referenced paragraph 14 of the Data Rules, which stated that all types of data not described in paragraph 11 
shall be referred to as non-public domain data. They stated that if paragraph 14 was meant to be limited to 
individual vessel and personal data, it would have said “all types of data relating to individual persons and 
vessels not described in paragraph 11 shall be referred to as non-public domain data”, but it makes no 
reference to data relating to individual persons and vessels. They stated that they fully understand that the 
Commission would have had in mind information beyond that relating to individual vessels and personal 
data when it decided that information such as that in the dCMR would be confidential. The dCMR includes 
comments by the Secretariat about the compliance of CCMs with particular obligations. It also includes the 
comments by CCMs in response. This information is part of a working discussion on compliance by CCMs 
and they stated that they expect that other CCMs would share their view that this information is confidential. 
They also considered that the discussion on this information as part of a working process should be 
confidential. For this reason, PNA and Tokelau stated that they consider that the dCMR should continue to 
be discussed in closed session to protect the confidentiality of the substantial volume of non-public domain 
data used in the CMR. 
381. 
The Chair observed that the same positions were expressed at TCC18, and looked forward to 
constructive discussions to resolve the issue in the future. 
382. 
WCPFC19 was not able to reach agreement on the development of guidelines for 
observer participation.  
 
9.1.4 
Develop Corrective Actions 
383. 
The Chair noted the advice of TCC18 (in WCPFC19-2022-26) related to the nomination of a Lead 
to develop corrective actions to encourage and incentivise CCMs’ compliance with the Commission’s 
obligations, where non-compliance is identified. 
384. 
The USA stated it nominated Ms Elizabeth O’Sullivan. 
69  
  
385. 
Samoa on behalf of FFA Members stated that they wanted to ensure that the scope of work on the 
issue was clear, and recommended that the first task for CCMs was to develop a clear TOR to guide the 
work.  FFA members advocated looking first at the use of cooperative and supportive actions as opposed to 
corrective actions, and stated they would be prepared to consider corrective actions once the current 
imbalance and bias in the CMS was addressed. They stated that this was in line with the principle of 
cooperation towards compliance, as stated in paragraph 3 of the CMS measure, to promote a supportive, 
collaborative, and non-adversarial approach where possible, with the aim of ensuring long-term compliance, 
including considering capacity assistance needs or other quality improvement and corrective actions. 
386. 
WCPFC19 welcomed the nomination by the United States for Ms. Elizabeth O'Sullivan 
to lead work through the CMS IWG to develop corrective actions to encourage and incentivize 
CCM's compliance with the Commission's obligations, where non-compliance is identified, and 
encourages CCMs to participate in this work.  
 
9.1.5 
Review of Aggregate Tables 
387. 
The TCC Chair discussed WCPFC19-2022-CMS_Agg tables Proposed approach for the 
aggregate tables review process in 2023. He noted that a process was piloted at TCC17. He stated that 
although the aggregate tables were not considered at TCC18, he provided a paper (WCPFC-TCC18-2022-
13) to TCC18 that described the review of the process in 2021 and sought guidance from CCM regarding 
what the review process could look like in the future. He stated that some constructive feedback was 
provided. He noted that most CCMs that provided feedback are of the view that the identification of 
anomalies should be a member-led and collective process. Concerns raised regarding neutrality can be 
addressed by defining a clear role for the Secretariat in presenting information and the Chair in presiding 
over the collective review of the aggregated tables in a fair and unbiased manner. He stated that the reframing 
of the purpose of the aggregated tables to focus initially on identification of anomalies and the suggestion 
of a phased approach was useful, and highlighted that the aggregate tables could be used to identify issues 
that warrant consideration without presupposing the cause of the issue, and that TCC has a clear role in 
discussing what the causes might be and how these can be addressed. He observed that differing views 
expressed regarding the application of a compliance status associated with the review of aggregated tables 
were not necessarily inconsistent, and noted the following points: i) Where TCC’s review of the aggregate 
tables clearly identifies a systemic failure on the part of a flag state to take action in response to 
infringements, CCMs may be supportive of having this recorded via a compliance status, but it is not clear 
how the application of a compliance status associated with a specific obligation in a specific reporting year 
would be applied or linked to a systemic issue across multiple years and/or multiple obligations; ii) There 
is no precedent for how TCC would make a determination of where an anomaly is associated with flag state 
failure and any corresponding threshold; iii) The opportunity to test the identification of anomalies and 
determination of causes by TCC19 will be an important part of aggregate tables review process. He stated 
that the implementation of a tracking tool for observer report requests is widely expected to lead to 
significant improvements in this issue which will help streamline the resolution of outstanding case file 
cases. Based on the feedback provided, the TCC Chair proposed a high-level approach for review of the 
aggregate tables at TCC19, provided an overview of key work to be undertaken up to and through TCC19 
to WCPFC20, and proposed specific recommendations drawn from CCM feedback for WCPFC19 
consideration and endorsement. 
388. 
Palau on behalf of FFA members generally supported the proposed approach regarding 
recommendations relating to the high-level approach for aggregate tables review at TCC19, and suggested 
being cautious about putting a hard deadline against finalization of cases in the online CCFS, as this will 
would be dependent on a number of factors, with no specific date set in the CMM. However, they noted 
CCMs should be encouraged to try and resolve the cases as soon as possible and that the Secretariat can set 
70  
  
a deadline for drawing out the information for the aggregate tables. On the recommendations relating to the 
key work for 2023, they welcomed tasking the TCC Chair and the Secretariat to develop guidelines rather 
than a format for reporting against paragraphs 34(a) and 34(b) for outstanding cases. They reiterated their 
position to not focus on vessel-level cases but rather on review of aggregated information. In addition, they 
reiterated that compliance status be de-linked from the review of the aggregate tables, but stated their 
willingness to consider how the result of the review of the aggregate tables be reflected in the provisional 
and final CMR. Regarding the invitation to the Commission to provide advice related to the level of detail 
needed in observer reports to support investigations, FFA members noted that this would be case-dependent 
and any detail needed from the observer report would have to be in line with the ROP Minimum data fields. 
389. 
FSM on behalf of PNA and Tokelau supported the statement by FFA, while noting they lacked the 
time to consider the paper as thoroughly as they would have liked. They attached high priority to making 
effective use of the aggregate tables in the manner anticipated in CMM 2021-03, while stating their deep 
concern regarding the highly biased results in most of the aggregate tables against the purse seine fishery 
and purse seine CCMs including PNA flag-state CCMs.  They stated that until that flaw was fixed, the 
aggregate tables affected by that imbalance should not be used to determine a compliance assessment 
outcome. They stated that fixing the effect of that imbalance was a key issue for TCC19 both in respect of 
the aggregate tables and more generally, and needed to be a specific element in any schedule of key work 
for 2023. 
390. 
The EU broadly supported the workplan outlined and stated that the three key areas of work reflect 
quite accurately what needs to be done. Regarding the extension of observer reports tracking functionalities, 
the EU stated that it should be possible to identify open cases for which a report is required but not yet 
provided, so open cases, closed cases, and those for which no report had yet been received could be 
differentiated. Regarding the comment by FSM on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau, the EU stated that the 
TCC Chair mentioned some strands of work that could start to address this. One is related to the revision of 
the ROP observer forms, which were designed to serve scientific purposes but are also used for CMS 
purposes, and should be revised to reduce the risk of false positives, of which there are many. The EU stated 
that this could reduce the burden and hopefully address part of the imbalance issue that had been raised by 
many members. 
391. 
RMI supported FSM’s comments, and stated the need to look at longline obligations on the high 
seas, stating that this is fundamental in the unfairness of the CMS process. RMI stated that the process was 
paused not because CCMs did not want a CMS, but because it needed to be fair. It stated that a number of 
proposals to address unfairness and data gaps had been forwarded, including increasing longline observer 
coverage, and ER. RMI stated it looked forward to developing robust CMS measure that looked at all 
obligations and what must be done collectively in the high seas. 
392. 
The USA stated that the paper prepared by the TCC Chair was useful and outlined the issues that 
need to be considered. Regarding the issue of fairness and imbalance between purse seine and longline 
observer coverage, the USA stated that this has to be addressed not simply by TCC through a focus on the 
CMS, but more broadly by the Commission. 
393. 
Tuvalu on behalf of PNA and Tokelau stated that at various points under Agenda Item 9, they had 
referred to the imbalance and bias in the CMS. They stated that for the benefit of CCMs who were not at 
TCC18 they would explain what they mean by those features, and how they affect the CMS. PNA and 
Tokelau stated they see the CMS as deeply flawed because of the difference in observer coverage, which 
provides much of the information for the CMS between the purse seine fishery (100%) and the longline 
fishery (5%). The effect of the difference in coverage is that almost all potential infringements in the purse 
seine fishery will be reported for issues monitored by observers, while almost none of the potential 
infringements in the longline fishery will be reported for those issues. They stated that this means, for 
71  
  
example, that the tables of reported shark-related potential infractions include virtually all of those incidents 
on purse seine vessels and almost none of those incidents on longline vessels. PNA and Tokelau stated that 
as a result, many of the conclusions of the CMS are deeply biased against the purse seine flag state CCMs 
and the purse seine fishery overall.  Because over 90% of the industrial purse seine fishery occurs in PNA 
waters and much of it is conducted by PNA flag state CCMs, this means that the CMS is deeply biased also 
against fishing in PNA waters and PNA members as flag states;  the bias favours longline flag state CCMs 
and fishing in international waters overall. This imbalance and bias deeply affect the CMS and the way in 
which results from the CMR and aggregate tables can be used. Within the limits of this bias, the 
Commission’s compliance processes can be used to identify compliance issues and encourage compliance 
in a positive and collaborative way. But the compliance process cannot be used for follow-up in terms of 
compliance scoring or actions that have any punitive implication. They stated that given the “one-eyed” 
compliance process, this would be completely unfair and PNA and Tokelau would not agree to the use of 
the compliance review processes in that way, and that is why TCC18 recommended that the Commission 
recognise the need to address this imbalance. 
394. 
FSM on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau stated they also supported the proposed high-level approach 
for reviewing the aggregate tables at TCC19, as mentioned by FFA members. In particular, they supported 
the approach of CCMs notifying the Chair ahead of time of potential anomalies for discussion. On the scope 
of the tables, they stated that most of the tables are of relatively limited value at this present because of the 
effect of the observer coverage imbalance They stated that one way to strengthen the aggregate tables would 
be to include tables of limits and the reported levels of catch or effort against the limits, as these are 
Commission core business and don’t generally depend in observer data.  They advocated that this be 
included in the revision of the CMS CMM in 2023. On key work for 2023, they generally agreed with 
including a focus on the use of the Article 25 (2) tables because they are not affected by the observer 
coverage imbalance. They considered that both the static and the dynamic tables are needed for the reasons 
explained in the paper, while key work for 2023 must include fixing the effect of the observation imbalance 
both in respect of the aggregate tables and the CMS more generally, and requested that this be included. 
PNA and Tokelau stated they were not able to support a decision for the information on tracking of observer 
reports to be used in association with the aggregate tables. They stated that they were unsure that there is 
any documentation available yet on how the tracking of observer reports works, including how requests are 
made for observer reports and how information on the sending of observer reports is generated. They stated 
their understanding that in the current system, this information is provided by observer providers and with 
the CCFS enhancements this information will be provided by the flag state. They noted that improving the 
functionality of the CCFS on observer report tracking is included on the Secretariat’s programme for 2023, 
and suggested that the Secretariat be asked to provide a paper for TCC19 describing the process of tracking 
of observer reports requested and received, with any appropriate data, for review by TCC19. TCC could 
then review whether the way the data has been generated and collated is appropriate for consideration in 
conjunction with the aggregate tables. PNA and Tokelau stated that a key consideration would be whether 
the additional information on observer report tracking adds to or reduces the imbalance and bias in the CMS.  
PNA and Tokelau agreed that work is needed on the level of detail in observer reports required to support 
investigations, but suggested this work be undertaken by the ROP-IWG as an extension of previous 
discussions on this issue in the ROP-IWG.  
395. 
The EU thanked CCMs for clarifying their concerns relating to imbalance, and stated this is 
necessary to be addressed. The EU noted that 100% coverage in the purse seine fleet means there are about 
300 vessels fully observed, as against about 150 in the longline fleet given 5% observer coverage. It stated 
that perhaps doubling coverage in the longline fleet to 10% would result in a roughly equal number of 
observed vessels, and could address the issue as a first step. It noted that 100% coverage of the longline fleet 
would require 3000 observers, which could prove very difficult to achieve, especially in the short term. The 
EU suggested looking at specific steps to address the concerns expressed by PNA and FFA members, and 
72  
  
stated that for purposes of the CMS the Commission could choose not to consider all the information from 
the ROP.  
396. 
Kiribati stated that it appreciated the work by the Secretariat to enhance the CCFS in relation to the 
observer tracking tool. Kiribati noted discomfort with regard to the observer tracking tool process, noting 
that in the CMS the responsibility is for flag States to meet their responsibilities under Article 25. Kiribati 
raised the issue of observer safety related to transmission of observer reports via the CCFS. Kiribati 
suggested the flag state investigation process should be initiated through a flag state request for information 
approach.  Kiribati advocated delaying submission of observer reports via the CCFS.  
397. 
New Caledonia stated that it was highly involved in the ROP, and met the requirement for 5% 
observer coverage and sought to reach 10%, but experienced challenges in terms of the required human 
resources. It encouraged each CCM to make progress in the area of human observer coverage in the WCPFC 
Convention Area. 
398. 
RMI noted the EU’s comment, which illustrated the sheer extent of what needs to be done between 
purse seine and longline fleets to reach fairness in terms of the existing obligations. RMI stated that FFA 
members had a full suite of national and regional obligations. It stated that one approach to fairness would 
be to reduce the purse seine observer obligation. RMI stated that this was not its preferred approach, and 
expressed the hope the Commission would equalize the obligations for CCMs, particularly in the high seas. 
399. 
FSM stated that the agreed future work should include efforts to address the imbalance.  
400. 
WCPFC19 endorsed the proposed approach from the TCC Chair for the process to review 
aggregate tables in 2023 and the key work to be undertaken up to and through TCC19 and 
WCPFC20 (Attachment S). 
 
9.1.6 
Other future works 
401. 
The Chair stated that the Commission would consider other related reforms to enhance the CMS.  
The TCC Vice Chair confirmed that there were no specific TCC18 recommendations for consideration under 
this agenda item. 
402. 
Tonga on behalf of FFA members supported the TCC recommendations, in particular, the need for 
the Commission to address the imbalance between the information available for monitoring compliance 
between the longline and purse seine fisheries, noting this issue had been raised repeatedly, and called on 
the Commission to take action to address this imbalance. 
403. 
Tuvalu on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau stated they would be bringing proposals to TCC for 
reforms to the CMS to address the impacts of the imbalance on the CMS and looked forward to discussions 
on this important issue at TCC19. 
404. 
RMI on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau stated they attach the highest priority to the TCC 
recommendation that the Commission recognises the need to address the imbalance between the information 
available for monitoring compliance between the longline and purse seine fisheries. They stated that the 
next step is for the Commission to take action to address the imbalance. They stated that in their view this 
would involve: (i) fixing the imbalance, in particular by strengthening monitoring of longline fishing, 
especially in the high seas, noting that the weakness in monitoring of longlining, especially in the high seas, 
continues to be the major weakness in the Commission’s management programmes; and (ii) noting that 
73  
  
fixing the imbalance would take time, they stated that actions should be taken to address the impacts of the 
imbalance on the fairness and scope of the CMS. 
405. 
The Chair noted the points expressed by CCMs related to future work on the CMS. 
406. 
The Compliance Manager, in reflecting on the outcomes related to the CMS, noted the Secretariat’s 
workload for 2023, and observed 2023 would be a very busy year in terms of the work tasked to the 
Secretariat. She drew attention to WCPFC19-2022-IP18, which is the forecast of Secretariat’s work in 
support of the TCC workplan. She also noted WCPFC19-2022-FAC16-11, which addresses a proposal 
from the Secretariat to supplement the Secretariat’s Compliance team.  
9.2 
Consideration of Compliance Monitoring Report RY2021 and RY2022 in 2023 
407. 
The Chair noted the advice of TCC18 concerning the consideration of the compliance monitoring 
reports for 2022 (covering 2021 activities) and 2023 (covering 2022 activities) in 2023 as contained in 
WCPFC19-2022-26; the Secretariat’s preliminary assessment of its anticipated work commitments to 
support work of TCC in 2023 and 2024 in WCPFC19-2022-IP18; the Side by Side Comparison of draft 
Audit Points and Secretariat dCMR Criteria in WCPFC19-2022-27; and the Information note on the status 
of the dCMR prepared by the Secretariat in 2022 for review by TCC19 in 2023 in WCPFC19-2022-33.  
408. 
WCPFC19 noted the Secretariat’s information note on the status of the dCMR prepared 
by the Secretariat in 2022 for review at TCC19 in 2023 (WCPFC19-2022-33).  
409. 
WCPFC19 agreed to continue in 2023 to require CCMs to submit their Annual Report 
Part 2 at least 100 days prior to TCC19 (which is a date in mid-June instead of 1 July). 
 
9.2.1 
List of obligations to be reviewed by the Compliance Monitoring Scheme in 2023 
410. 
The Chair noted the advice of TCC18 on the list of obligations to be reviewed by the CMS in 2023 
as contained in WCPFC19-2022-26, noting that this was also linked to the outcomes of the discussion on 
audit points under (Agenda Item 9.1.1). 
411. 
The EU advocated adopting a similar list of obligations for 2023 as was adopted for 2022, and 
advocated for introducing audit points for use in the 2024 CMR process (for the 2023 fishing season).  
412. 
Tokelau on behalf of FFA members supported the TCC18 recommendation to adopt the same list 
of obligations for review in both the 2022 and 2023 dCMR, recognising the increased workload which may 
be associated with reviewing two years of dCMR next year. They stated that using the same list should assist 
in a smooth and efficient review of both CMRs at TCC19 noting that a new list could make the review 
process at TCC19 more challenging and time consuming. 
413. 
Australia, on behalf of FFA members thanked the Secretariat for WCPFC19-2022-27 Side by Side 
Comparison of draft Audit Points and Secretariat dCMR Criteria, noting that the paper shows that in 
comparing the audit points to criteria used by the Secretariat for the 60 obligations adopted by WCPFC18, 
31 obligations are the same, 23 are mostly the same, 5 are different and 1 is new. They stated that this was 
a useful analysis, and inquired how much work would be needed if the Secretariat was to look again at the 
assessment made in the 2022 dCMR for the 23 obligations that are mostly the same and the 5 obligations 
that are different, and whether this would be achievable in 2023.  
74  
  
414. 
The Compliance Manager noted there was a need to allow CCMs additional time to respond to 
issues, and stated that some CCMs had engaged actively, others less so. She stated that some issues would 
be forwarded to TCC irrespective of what happens with the audit points, and that much work would be 
required. Decisions would have to be made on whether the work this be done by CCMs and the Secretariat 
or TCC.  
415. 
WCPFC19 endorsed the list of obligations to be reviewed by the Compliance Monitoring 
Scheme in 2023 and noted it is the same list as adopted in 2022. (Attachment T)  
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 10  — LIFTING OF TEMPORARY SUSPENSIONS OF OBSERVER 
COVERAGE OBLIGATIONS DUE TO COVID 19  
416. 
The Compliance Manager introduced WCPFC19-2022-28 Updated Information related to the 
Resumption of Observer Placements. She noted with respect to recommencement of observer placements 
on purse seine vessels that the observer programmes had not reported significant issues in relation to their 
preparedness to support the resumption of 100% coverage of purse seine vessels from 1 January 2023. She 
noted that despite the loss of observers to other professions, feedback from observer programmes indicates 
the investment national observer programmes have continued to make in training and through some onshore 
work for observers has provided a good base level of preparedness for the progressive removal of the 
suspension of observer coverage for longline and purse seine fisheries and for transhipment. Efforts to re-
deploy observers, and to recruit and train new observers in preparation for the resumption of deployments, 
have also served to offset the loss of observers to some extent. Some CCMs have retained some coverage 
through the use of their own observers, particularly for deployments between their own ports.  
417. 
Japan noted the Secretariat’s presentation, but stated its concerns regarding the limited availability 
of flights which could constrain observers’ travel and achievement of 100% observer coverage on purse 
seine vessels as of 1 January 2023. Japan proposed a transitional period during which the coverage 
requirement would be ramped up.  
418. 
FSM on behalf of FFA members reiterated that the intersessional decisions to extend the temporary 
suspension of observer coverage requirement since March 2020 had impacted the livelihood of Pacific 
Island observers and their families and led to a lack of vital scientific and MCS information during this 
period. They supported the decision made by the Special Session of the Commission to lift the temporary 
suspension related to placement of observers on carrier vessels during transhipment and the requirement for 
observer coverage on purse seine vessels by 1 January 2023. They noted the positive and steady 
improvement to the rate of observer coverage on receiving vessels during transhipment since July 2022 and 
stated this established a good basis for the recommencement of observer placement when this obligation 
becomes effective on 1 January 2023. FFA members stated they had prepared for the recommencement of 
observer coverage on fishing vessels, including by conducting refresher training for observers and 
developing COVID-19 safety protocols and an observer redeployment plan that provides the basis for safe 
redeployment and repatriation of observers on fishing vessels. They stated their readiness to recommence 
observer placements on fishing vessels by 1 January 2023 and noted they looked forward to working 
collaboratively with other CCMs to ensure the redeployment of observers takes places smoothly and safely. 
419. 
New Zealand supported the comment made by FSM on behalf of FFA members, noting a Special 
Session of the Commission had already decided to resume observer coverage - the suspension was only ever 
intended to be a temporary situation.  New Zealand noted the Secretariat’s estimates of observer availability 
for transhipment, and stated that there had been plenty of time to prepare for resumption of these obligations. 
75  
  
420. 
Chinese Taipei stated it had already contacted observer providers, and was pleased that observer 
providers were ready to deploy observers. It stated, however, that circumstances of CCMs differed, noting 
for example that one CCM could not attend WCPFC19 in person, and stated it was willing to consider 
Japan’s proposal to allow exceptional cases.  
421. 
The USA stated it had used the time since the Special Session to begin resuming observer coverage, 
noting that currently over half of the US fleet is using observers, and that the American Samoa fleet would 
have 100% observer coverage by Jan 1, 2023. 
422. 
The Compliance Manager stated that she had observed a real spirit of cooperation between flag 
states, agents and observer programs, and offered to assist flag states with concerns regarding resumption 
of observer coverage by potentially facilitating their making contact with observer programs.  
423. 
Japan stated it had held further discussions during WCPFC19 regarding the resumption of coverage 
and could support resumption of the purse seine coverage requirement in January 2023.  
424. 
WCPFC19 noted the positive progress that has been made in resuming the placement of 
observers on purse seine vessels during the transitional period of 15 June – 1 January 2023 
(WCPFC19-2022-28). 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 11  — REPORTS FROM SUBSIDIARY BODIES AND WORKING 
GROUPS 
11.1 
SC18  
425. 
The SC Chair, Dr. Tuikolongahau Halafihi (Tonga) reported on key issues not covered under other 
agenda items for the Commission’s consideration, as referenced in WCPFC19-2022-29_rev1 Reference 
Document on other SC18 recommendations for Agenda Item 11.1. He highlighted two recommendations 
requiring the Commissions attention, regarding data gaps and how a lack of consensus should be reflected 
in SC reports (paragraphs 2 and 136, SC18 Outcomes Document).   
426. 
The EU commented that regarding data gaps it supported the recommendations of SC18. In relation 
to the absence of consensus raised in paragraph 136 of the SC18 Outcomes Document, it stated that the issue 
was not really a disagreement on the stock assessment and its outputs, but centred on a disagreement over 
how to reflect them in the SC reports. It stated that some CCMs did not want to allow the others to express 
their views and resulted in being unable to provide management recommendations for skipjack at WCPFC19. 
The EU stated that it is essential to avoid politicization of the Commission’s scientific recommendations 
and noted that Article 11 of the Convention allowed for the expression of majority and minority views if 
consensus could not be reached. The EU strongly suggested that this approach be used, so that the situation 
that occurred at SC18 is not repeated. 
427. 
Samoa on behalf of FFA members stated that, regarding the issue of absence of consensus, it is 
important to present information correctly under the appropriate heading. This is necessary in order to 
clearly distinguish scientific advice from management options and recommendations, and thereby bring 
clarity to discussions and negotiations. 
428. 
Tokelau on behalf of the PNA welcomed discussion on the presentation of management advice on 
stocks by the SC, and stated that from its perspective the issue was about the clarity and integrity of the 
scientific advice. They stated that SC participants sometimes seek to include information about stock status 
76  
  
and trends in the management advice as if it implies certain management advice, and stated that in their 
view, this tends to cloud the nature of the scientific advice. They stated that if SC is providing advice to 
managers, that advice should be clearly stated and not implied. 
429. 
The USA stated that a basic tenet of science is scientific integrity, and that it is important for SC to 
provide advice to the Commission. It stated that Article 11, paragraph 4 of the Convention allowed for 
majority and minority opinions to be expressed in the advice provided. 
430. 
PNG on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau stated that in their view there was never an issue about 
whether differing views should be recorded or not, but that the difference was around where certain text 
should be placed in the report. They stated the same situation applied to the recording of differing views; 
these weren’t included simply because there was no agreement on where to place the record of those 
differing views, and participants were not prevented from recording their view. 
431. 
RMI on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau stated they welcomed discussion on the presentation of 
management advice on stocks by the SC, and wanted to ensure that management advice from the SC is 
clearly stated and clearly understood. They stated that in their experience, the way in which some of the 
management advice is formulated has led to information on stock status and trends within the management 
advice being wrongly taken as advice or a recommendation. They stated their intent to continue to work 
towards ensuring the clarity and integrity of the management advice provided by the SC. 
432. 
The EU noted that, in paragraph 136 of the SC18 Outcomes Document, SC was seeking guidance 
from the Commission. The EU stated that while CCMs may have differing views of what should be in one 
section or another section of the report, this should not prevent the SC from making its management advice. 
The EU stated that the views of CCMs cannot trump the text of the Convention, and stressed that Article 11 
indicated how to deal with disagreements over what should be contained in reports.  
433. 
Tokelau reiterated that there was agreement that the differing views should be recorded at SC, but 
there was not agreement regarding what part of the report these views should be in.   
434. 
WCPFC19 endorsed the SC18 recommendation that the inclusion of tables of the 
operational level catch and effort data fields for longline, purse seine and pole-and-line gears, as 
a guideline and without the column of “binding” and adding the title of “Annex 2, guidelines for 
data submission of operational level catch and effort data fields for fisheries”, as an additional 
ANNEX of the “Scientific Data to be Provided to the Commission”, with an additional paragraph 
under Section 3. Operational level catch and effort data as follows: 
“Annex 2 provides tables of the guidelines of operational level catch and effort data fields 
for longline, purse seine and pole-and-line gears in order to clarify and assist members in 
understanding the requirements of each data field and thereby facilitate the submission of 
data to the WCPFC.” (Attachment N) 
435. 
WCPFC noted paragraph 136 of the SC Outcomes Document, the guidance provided to 
subsidiary bodies is set out in Article 11(4) of the Convention, and how the views of CCMs are 
reflected in SC reports is a matter for the SC to determine. 
436. 
WCPFC19 adopted the Summary Report of SC18 (WCPFC19-2022-SC18) and 
endorsed the recommendations not covered under other agenda items (WCPFC19-2022-29 rev 
1.) 
77  
  
 
11.2 
TCC18 
437. 
The TCC Vice-Chair referenced WCPFC19-2022-30. Reference document for TCC18 
recommendations for Agenda 11.2 and provided a brief overview of the TCC18 outcomes.   
438. 
The Chair sought views on the TCC18 recommendations set out in WCPFC19-2022-30 related to 
IWG-ROP reactivation, RFV SSPs amendment, IT/VMS Security Audit and Scientific Data provision.  The 
Chair confirmed that the TS-IWG-related recommendations would be considered under Agenda 11.4.   
Noting that there were no comments on these recommendations, the Chair requested views on other TCC18 
recommendations not considered elsewhere in the agenda. 
439. 
Vanuatu on behalf of FFA members thanked the TCC Vice-Chair for the report and supported the 
TCC18 recommendations not considered under other agenda items, but reiterated its position stated under 
Agenda 9.2 that FFA members are not supportive of an extra day for TCC19. 
440. 
Tuvalu on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau supported the FFA statement, noting that as expressed at 
TCC18, they did not support an additional day for TCC19 for work on the CMS, noting their position is that 
the CMS is deeply flawed and of relatively little value, so it isn’t worth a lot of time. They stated that an 
additional day had already been added to TCC and that should be enough, especially with the audit points 
developed. They stated that in their view, the CMS for the two years can be completed in the time available 
at TCC19 if all CCMs participate efficiently. 
441. 
The Chair confirmed that no change would be made to the scheduled dates of the TCC19 meeting.     
442. 
At the request of the Chair, the TCC Vice-Chair briefly introduced a paper recommending updates 
to the TCC Workplan 2022-2024 (WCPFC19-2022-34). 
443. 
New Zealand thanked the TCC Vice Chair for updating the workplan, and asked whether the review 
of the seabird mitigation measure should be in the workplan for 2023-2024, and noted that no further action 
in 2023 was proposed for the RBAF. The TCC Vice-Chair stated that with respect to seabirds the workplan 
could be updated intersessionally based on the outcome of WCPFC19, noting that no additional work was 
expected for RBAF in 2023, it did not need to be included.  
444. 
Tokelau on behalf of the PNA and Tokelau requested that Priority 5 relating to participation of 
observers in the CMS be deleted because there was no agreement on this work and be replaced with a new 
priority “Address the impact of the imbalance in observer information on the CMS.” 
445. 
In response to a request from the Chair, the TCC Vice-Chair clarified that Agenda 9 CMS-IWG 
workplan discussions, were not reflected in the revised TCC workplan thus far.   
446. 
In response to the PNA and Tokelau suggestion, the EU and USA requested that the work related 
to participation of observers be square bracketed, to reflect it had been paused, but be kept in the workplan, 
as it had been agreed to by the Commission in the CMM so should be retained in the workplan as a priority 
that should be addressed. 
447. 
Tokelau indicated that although it was not their preference, they could accept the work related to 
participation of observers being square bracketed.  They explained that the issue is the sequencing.  If work 
to address the imbalance in observer information is completed, then the TCC could revisit the participation 
of observers in the CMS. 
78  
  
448. 
The Chair, noting there were no further views, confirmed that the work related to participation of 
observers would be square bracketed in the updated TCC workplan. 
449. 
WCPFC19 endorsed the following recommendations of TCC18: 
Tasking the Intersessional Working Group on the Regional Observer Programme (IWG-
ROP) 
i 
TCC18 supported the Commission’s intention to reactivate the IWG-ROP.  
ii TCC18 recommended that the Commission task the IWG-ROP, once it is 
reactivated, to develop draft recommended modifications to ROP data fields with 
the intention of allowing for more useful consideration of ROP data in the CCFS 
and in the Compliance Monitoring Scheme processes, and while taking into 
account their implications, including the impact on observer workloads and 
observer safety, as well as any related training needs.  
iii TCC18 recommended that the IWG-ROP, once it is reactivated, prioritize work 
on issues such as a solution to identifying interactions with whale sharks and 
cetaceans, and on the inclusion of ROP data fields that were identified in the TCC 
Workplan 2022-2024 project specific task (j), and to identify any CMM that 
should also be prioritized in this work.  
RFV Standards, Specifications and Procedures 
iv TCC18 recommended to WCPFC19 that the recommended edits in Box 1 in 
paragraph 6 of TCC18-2022-21 (Attachment 2) are adopted by the Commission. 
(draft TCC18 Summary Report paragraph 180 and Attachment E) (Attachment 
U, CMM 2022-05 Standards, specifications and procedures for the Western and 
Central Pacific Fisheries Commission Record of Fishing Vessels). 
WCPFC IT/VMS Security Audit 
v TCC18 supported the Secretariat’s recommendation to expand the annual VMS 
Security Audit budget, to include a more dynamic and continual assessment of 
the WCPFC information systems, with an estimated budget of $11,900 USD   
(draft TCC18 Summary Report paragraph 236). 
vi TCC18 recommended to the Commission that an additional budget allocation of 
$15,000 USD be set aside for annual penetration testing of the WCPFC 
information systems (draft TCC18 Summary Report paragraph 237). 
450. 
WCPFC19 adopted the TCC work plan for 2022-2024, as revised by the TCC Vice-Chair. 
(Attachment V) 
451. 
WCPFC19 adopted the Summary Report of TCC18 (WCPFC19-2022-TCC18). 
 
11.3 
NC18 
452. 
WCPFC19 adopted the report of NC18 (WCPFC19-2022-NC18). 
79  
  
 
11.4 
Other Intersessional Work and Working Groups 
11.4.1 E-reporting and E-monitoring (ER&EMWG) 
453. 
Australia provided an overview of the status of ER&EMWG work in 2022, in response to the TCC 
workplan agreed at WCPFC18 (WCPFC19-2022-ERandEMWG-01 Summary of the work undertaken by 
the Electronic Reporting and Electronic Monitoring Working Group (ERandEM WG) in 2022). The 
workplan for 2022 was for TCC was to: i) Consider and provide advice on outputs from the ER&EMWG, 
including those related to existing obligations, data gaps and the prioritisation of ER and EM, and ii) Draft 
minimum standards for EM. TCC was also tasked to consider and provide advice on outputs from the 
ER&EMWG, including a draft EM CMM. In response to this workplan, the ER&EMWG achieved 3 main 
outcomes in 2022. Circulation of the current version of the SSPs in March with comments received from 11 
participants. CCMs’ comments linked to how best to progress the drafting of EM SSPs and any associated 
CMM. In particular, some CCMs noted a difficulty in progressing the detailed drafting of the SSPs without 
broader understanding of the scope and application of any EM program in WCPFC. The EM Framework 
discussion paper sought to ensure that any EM framework recognised the precedents and decisions of 
Commission. It considered how members could implement EM and the potential interaction with the ROP. 
The discussion paper sought to find a way of balancing the needs of different members by providing a 
flexible way of implementing CMMs to give effect to the Commission’s requirements for at-sea monitoring 
for scientific and compliance purposes. In July, the EREMWG conducted a two-day virtual meeting. The 
key outcome was the working group’s agreement to concurrently develop in 2022 and 2023: (a) an At-Sea 
Monitoring CMM, (b) an EM program CMM, and (c) the associated SSPs in 2022 and 2023.These 
workstreams will form the basis of the ER&EMWG’s work in 2023. Australia noted that the various 
elements of work and progress on ER and EM among CCMs is extremely promising, and the need to 
improve reporting and monitoring of fishing activity within the WCPO remains a consistent theme in the 
Commission’s discussions. In particular, the Commission has collectively recognised the need to prioritise 
increased levels of reporting and monitoring in the high seas. This has also been addressed in parallel 
workstreams in the Commission, including the Transhipment IWG, the MCS provisions of various CMM 
proposals (including discussions regarding the tropical tuna measure), and ER initiatives. Australia also 
noted that the nominated Chair, Claire van der Geest, had left her role at the Australian Fisheries 
Management Authority, and that unfortunately, Australia was not in a position to continue chairing the 
ER&EMWG. It suggested that WCPFC19 provided an opportunity to transition the chair’s role to another 
CCM. Noting this, Australia stated it was in discussions with other CCMs regarding a potential nomination 
for a new chair. Australia stated it led the ER&EMWG beginning in 2015 and was proud of the significant 
achievements on both ER and EM development and implementation. Australia stated it continues to support 
and prioritise the development and implementation of robust monitoring within WCPFC and remains 
committed to continued engagement and progress in the ER&EMWG. Australia stated it looks forward to 
supporting a new chair to continue the successful work of the ER&EMWG. 
454. 
FSM on behalf of FFA members thanked the Chair of the ER&EM WG for her effort to progress 
this work this year. They supported the proposed amendment from the fifth ER&EM WG meeting to the 
existing TCC workplan to support the timely progression of the Regional EM Programme. As stated under 
Agenda Item 4, FFA members shared with the Commission their EM SSPs through WCPFC19-2022-DP08 
to be used as a basis to help progress the work on the development of EM SSPs by the ER&EM WG and 
with the aim of ensuring compatibility and complementarity of EM frameworks across the WCPFC 
Convention Area. 
455. 
New Zealand stated that regarding ER, FFA members supported the recommendation from a 
majority of CCMs at TCC18 that the Commission agree that CCMs shall submit operational catch and effort 
80  
  
data in accordance with the agreed SSPs for ER in the WCPFC operational catch and effort data and observer 
data from 1st of January 2024. They noted that FFA members also tabled WCPFC19-2022-DP05, which 
was discussed at WCPFC19 through the ER SWG. 
 
456. 
WCPFC19 noted with appreciation the report of the Chair of the ER&EMWG. 
457. 
WCPFC19 adopted CMM 2022-06 Conservation and Management Measure on Daily 
Catch and Effort Reporting (Attachment W).  
458. 
WCPFC19 agreed that after 1 January 2024 those CCMs with vessels not yet 
implementing electronic reporting of catch and effort data on the high seas provide an update to 
TCC each year until full implementation is achieved. 
459. 
WCPFC19 agreed that those CCMs that cannot electronically report its catch and effort 
data in accordance with the agreed ‘Standards, Specifications and Procedures for Electronic 
Reporting in the WCPFC operational catch and effort data’ should report to TCC each year on 
any implementation issues. 
460. 
WCPFC19 tasked SC19 and TCC19 to provide guidance to the Commission on how 
CCMs can provide operational catch and effort data to the Commission more frequently during 
the year. In particular, this guidance will consider CCMs’ implementation of data provision: 
a. 
within 30 days of the end of a trip and, where applicable, at the end of every 
transhipment at sea; and/or 
b. 
by 1 July and 31 December with available information for that calendar year. 
 
11.4.2 Transhipment review (TS-IWG) 
461. 
WCPFC19 received a brief progress report from the Co-Chairs Alex Kahl (USA) and Felix Toa 
Ngwango (Vanuatu) of the Transhipment review IWG (TS-IWG) on the progress of the working group, as 
outlined in WCPFC19-2022-TS TS-IWG Co-Chairs’ report to WCPFC19 (28 November 2022. The Co-
Chairs noted that WCPFC19 also received a proposal from the USA with (WCPFC19-2022-DP02 
Strengthening and Revising CMM 2009-06 in 2023), which was introduced under Agenda Item 4.  
462. 
The Chair noted the need to also consider the TCC18 recommendation related to the transhipment 
observer data field in working paper WCPFC19-2022-30 Reference Document on TCC18 
Recommendations for Agenda 11.2 paragraph 2 (vi) to (viii), and the analysis submitted by the Secretariat 
and SPC to the Commission of how TCC18’s transhipment recommendations could be implemented to 
achieve CCMs’ desired outcomes in respect of observer monitoring of transhipments (WCPFC19-2022-
32).  
463. 
The Co-Chairs outline the recommendations as contained in WCPFC19-2022-TS. 
464. 
RMI on behalf of PNA and Tokelau stated they had some concerns over Recommendation 4 
regarding the IWG-ROP considering the FC-3 form and its data fields for inclusion on the ROP Minimum 
Standard Data Fields or as minimum data fields for observer transhipment monitoring, noting that this was 
due to the operational nature of placing observers, and their ability to follow-carrier through to port of 
unloading, once placed to observe a high-seas transhipment event. They asked the Secretariat whether their 
81  
  
understanding of the operational nature of observer placement is accurate? The Secretariat indicated it was. 
In response, RMI stated that in order to close out an important gap in the monitoring of high seas product 
movement, PNA and Tokelau reiterated their call at TCC18 to make FC-3 a carrier form to close out this 
gap and link the information to the data fields in Attachment 2 of WCPFC19-2022-32. 
465. 
The Ocean Foundation, also on behalf of the Pew Charitable Trusts, stated their strong support for 
the workplan for the transhipment IWG. They noted that to draft a set of revisions of CMM 2009-06 for 
presentation at TCC19 would take a series of focused conversations and discussions as envisioned in the 
workplan. They noted their disappointment that in-person meetings could not be planned to progress that 
work prior to TCC, and called on all members to actively engage in the IWG's work during 2023 to meet 
the workplan's objectives. They stated that that they stand ready to support that work.  
466. 
WCPFC19 noted with appreciation the report of the Co-Chairs of the TS-IWG and 
endorsed the following recommendations of the Co-Chairs (WCPFC19-2022-IWG-TS_rev2): 
i 
WCPFC19 adopted the Minimum data fields for Observer transhipment 
monitoring as listed in Attachment X as data fields to be collected by 
transhipment observers during transhipment events, as of 1 April 2023.  
ii 
WCPFC19 agreed to amend the ‘Data fields’ item of the Agreed Minimum 
Standards and Guidelines of the Regional Observer Programme to read as follows:  
“For transhipment on the high seas, transhipment ROP providers shall send the 
agreed ROP minimum standards data in forms FC-1 and FC-2 (Attachment X of 
WCPFC19 Summary Report) to the Commission Secretariat within 90 days of the 
disembarkation of the observer from the carrier.” 
iii 
WCPFC19 requested the Secretariat and Scientific Services Provider to provide a 
report to TCC19 and WCPFC20 on the outcomes of implementation of the short-
term implementation phase (WCPFC19-2022-32, paragraphs 11-22). 
iv 
WCPFC19 requested TCC20 (after more than one year of implementation), and 
the IWG-ROP, consider the ROP data fields in FC-1 and FC-2 data fields and 
whether any revisions are necessary to the minimum data fields for Observer 
transhipment monitoring. 
v 
WCPFC19 recommended FC-3 form be referred to the TS-IWG and the IWG-
ROP if it is reinitiated, to consider the data fields required to be collected by 
carrier vessels to complement the data to be collected by observers as referenced 
in Attachment X.  
467. 
WCPFC19 also endorsed the following recommendation of TCC18 related to ROP 
Minimum Transhipment Observer Data: 
i 
TCC18 noted the Commission has already adopted ER standards for observer 
data and that the development of standards for ER by transhipment observers or 
providers in 2023 could significantly shorten the required timeline for ER of 
transhipment observer data to the Secretariat.  
82  
  
468. 
WCPFC19 adopted the TS IWG 2023 Work Plan (Attachment Y). 
 
11.4.3 Crew Labour Standards 
469. 
The Co-Leads of the intersessional work on crew labour standards, Putuh Suadela (Indonesia) and 
Sarah McAvinchey (New Zealand) provided an update on the workshop held in July (referenced as 
WCPFC19-2022- Labour), and noted that a meeting would be held at WPCFC19 to discuss the proposed 
CMM, which the co-chairs noted needed to be refocused during the IWGs work in 2023. The co-chairs 
highlighted the moral imperative of this work and their commitment to making progress along with CCMs 
in 2023..  
470. 
Niue on behalf of FFA members thanked the Co-Leads for their leadership during the intersessional 
period and at WCPFC19 to re-strategize the Commission's approach to the draft CMM.  They noted that 
improving crew labour standards and the passage of a binding CMM focussing on crew labour standards 
was a key priority for FFA members and had been identified by Pacific leaders as a focus area. They stated 
that a core principle for FFA members is the importance of their people. Niue stated that FFA members have 
adopted crew labour aspects into their harmonised minimum terms and conditions for access by fishing 
vessels to act on the need to protect crew. They stated that FFA members are encouraged by the engagement 
of CCMs through the intersessional period and look forward to continued commitment by all CCMs. 
However, FFA members expressed disappointment in the slow advancement of the draft CMM. They stated 
that the improvement of crew labour standards and elimination of human rights violations is a moral 
imperative, and that the Commission should continue the work on the draft CMM in 2023, including 
ensuring crew have their rights protected under law through contracts or other legal mechanisms. FFA 
members stated that further work would also be needed to address the most severe crimes such as forced 
labour, human trafficking and modern slavery, and stated they remained committed to continuing work 
through the IWG to progress this important task, with a view to having a binding CMM. 
471. 
The USA joined with FFA members in thanking the Co-Leads.  It commented that it also views the 
issue as an imperative that be addressed by the Commission, and expressed disappointment that more 
progress had not been made. The USA stated it would like to see a commitment that this be completed in 
2023, with a binding CMM. 
472. 
The EU reiterated its commitment to support the work and stated its hope that it could be finalized 
soon. 
473. 
WCPFC noted with appreciation the Report of the Co-Leads of the Crew Labour 
Standards IWG and the importance that CCMs attach to progressing expeditiously a CMM on 
crew labour standards. 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 12  — ADOPTION OF THE 2023 IUU VESSEL LIST 
474. 
The Chair noted reference paper WCPFC19-2022-31, which includes the recommendations of 
TCC18 on this issue. She stated that the proposed 2023 IUU Vessel List is the same IUU Vessel List for 
2022. 
475. 
Nauru on behalf of FFA members supported the retention of NEPTUNE, FU LIEN No.1 and YU 
FONG 168 on the WCPFC IUU Vessel List for 2023. They thanked Chinese Taipei for responding to the 
83  
  
questions they had raised concerning beneficial ownership during TCC18 and stated they would respond to 
those comments at TCC19. As was agreed at WCPFC17, FFA members recommended that the Executive 
Director be tasked accordingly to continue to follow up with the former flag States, CCMs, and RFMOs 
(WCPFC17 Summary Report, paragraph 388). 
476. 
Vanuatu provided an update on information presented by Vanuatu at TCC18 regarding two foreign 
fishing vessels conducting fishing activities in Vanuatu waters without licences, which was ongoing at that 
time. Vanuatu thanked FFA, SPC, WCPFC and the French government for their support in ensuring that the 
matter be heard in court. The fishing vessels entered Vanuatu waters without notice or valid licences between 
December 2020 and January 2021 and carried out fishing activities until they were apprehended with the 
help of PMW Patrol Boat RVS Tukoro and brought to port. All crew were apprehended and underwent 
COVID-19 protocols before being held in custody. Court proceedings commenced in July 2022. Evidence 
provided included video footage, expert witness statements, photographs, defendants’ inconsistent 
statements, and an absence of fishing vessel devices and licences. The Supreme Court issued a verdict of 
not guilty on all charges on 29 July. The Supreme Court ruled that fishing activities were recreational in 
nature and that fishing gear was stored in a manner not ready to be used. The Office of the Public Prosecution 
filed an appeal application, which was accepted. The Court of Appeal convened in November and ruled that 
the Defence Counsel and Supreme Court judge had erred in their judgement and interpretation of the law 
regarding fishing. The Court of Appeal ruled for a retrial and that the matter be brought before the Supreme 
Court again. Vanuatu stated that the outcome to date was positive, but stated it wished to draw the attention 
of WCPC19 to the issue of how well-versed CCMs’ respective judiciaries are with respect to fisheries or 
maritime related matters. It noted that significant work was needed to educate the public and agencies (e.g., 
the police, judiciary, education system, industry and the general population) regarding fisheries-related 
matters and the need to protect and sustainably use these resources. It stated that such undertakings may be 
the sole responsibility of each CCM’s national government based on advice and guidance from national 
fisheries agencies, and regional and international fisheries organisations. It commended FFA’s efforts to 
organize regional judicial meetings, whereby judges and lawyers meet for a week to discuss fisheries-related 
matters, and develop familiarization with regional fisheries work, data, surveillance and enforcement, and 
evidence. It stated that this was a good initiative for all CCMs to adopt and implement nationally with some 
guidance from their regional and international partners. With respect to the case in question, Vanuatu stated 
it is fortunate and grateful that the Court of Appeal ruled in the State’s favour, and called for a retrial. 
However, it stated its concern that the case proved difficult due to a lack of understanding regarding 
fisheries, legislation and policies, and evidence. As a consequence, Vanuatu put forward the following 
recommendations, which it stated could help CCM’s judiciaries and people to better understand fisheries 
resource management and sovereignty, sovereign rights, and associated concepts: i) Awareness on fisheries 
and related matters should be developed at national level with other relevant government agencies, members 
of the judiciary, border and enforcement, security, finance, health, labour, communications, education, 
NGOs and donor partners; ii) The Commission and CCMs should discuss and deliberate on the issues 
surrounding entry and exit of EEZs and most importantly, expand on certain language such as “Loitering”; 
and consider what measures should be imposed at the national level where foreign fishing vessels loiter in 
an EEZ without a valid license or good reason; and iii) Fisheries-related material should be introduced into 
the government education system, with media encouraged to ensure people are familiar with fisheries 
management matters; awareness programs should explain what fisheries management constitutes, and 
address the importance of fisheries resource management activities and the fight against IUU fishing 
activities in CCMs’ waters. 
  
477. 
WCPFC19 agreed to maintain the three vessels currently on the WCPFC IUU Vessel List 
and adopted the 2023 IUU Vessel List. (Attachment Z) 
 
84  
  
 
AGENDA ITEM 13  — REPORT OF FAC16 
13.1 
Report of the Sixteenth Finance and Administration Committee 
478. 
The FAC Co-chairs Mr. Michael Brakke (USA) and Mr. David Power (Australia) reported the key 
outcomes and recommendations of FAC16 and referenced the Summary Report (WCPFC19-2022-
FAC16).  
479. 
WCPFC19 accepted the audited financial statements for 2021 as set out in paper 
WCPFC19-2022-FAC16-06. 
480. 
WCPFC19 supported the appointment of Ernst & Young as auditor for the next 2-years 
to undertake the audits of the Commission’s 2022 and 2023 financial statements and accounts. 
481. 
WCPFC19 adopted an amendment to financial regulation 7.8 to read: 
“7.8. 
 Financial Regulation 7.5 and 7.7 on the application process and reporting 
requirements, respectively, shall be waived for: 
a) 
one traveller from each small island developing States and Participating 
Territories delegation to meetings of the Annual Session of the Commission and its 
subsidiary bodies; and  
b) 
the travel for the Chairs of SC, TCC, FAC Co-Chair and the WCPFC Vice Chair 
from SIDS to   the Annual Session.” 
 
482. 
WCPFC19 approved a 5% increase in professional staff salary from 2023, excluding the 
Executive Director, to align with the recent increase in other WCPFC staff salaries and account 
for cost of living increases due to inflation. 
483. 
With respect to broader issues related to the tri-annual market review and professional 
staff remuneration, WCPFC noted WCPFC19-2022-FAC16-10 but determined that additional 
information on relevant salary benchmarks and further discussion among CCMs is needed to 
reach consensus in future changes on professional staff salaries. WCPFC tasked the FAC Co-
Chairs to work intersessionally with Secretariat and interested CCMs to identify potential 
recommendations for consideration of FAC17 on the following issues, without prejudice to 
future decision-making process: 
i 
Options to align staff salary including the Executive Director, on a single 
simplified salary scale and/or other improvements related to the salary scale 
structure; 
ii 
The advantages and disadvantages of changing the denomination of professional 
staff salaries from IMF Special Drawing Rights (SDR) to U.S. Dollars for 
greater clarity and to align with the currency of the Commission’s budget and 
financial accounts; 
iii 
Options to establish automatic cost-of-living increases for staff salaries which 
could minimize the need for future salary reviews; 
85  
  
iv 
Changes to the content and frequency of salary market reviews including 
ensuring clearer comparison to the actual salary ranges comparable position in 
CROP agencies as well as remuneration of other relevant RFMO secretariats; 
v 
Methods to ensure any changes to staff salaries do not result in lower 
remuneration for existing professional staff; 
vi 
Any necessary changes to the Commission’s Staff Regulations or Financial 
Regulations to accomplish any resulting recommendations. 
 
484. 
WCPFC19 approved $80,000 for a short-term consultancy to support the increase in the 
Secretariat’s workload in the coming year. FAC16 included this cost in the budget recommended 
to the Commission. WCPFC19 tasked the Secretariat to report to TCC19 and FAC17 with its 
views on the necessity of continuing this consultancy or seeking other arrangements for future 
years, in order to inform further consideration as appropriate at FAC17. 
485. 
WCPFC19 adopted the report of FAC16, with a 2023 budget of USD8,819,999.   
(Attachment AA). 
 
13.2 
Budget for 2023 and Indicative Budgets for 2024 and 2025 
486. 
WCPFC adopted a 2023 budget of USD8,819,999.  The Commission agreed that any 
additional costs related to Commission decisions that are not already included in the budget, such 
as relating to costs for hosting potential meetings in 2023, will be added to the draw down from 
the Working Capital Fund. The Commission adopted the final adopted 2023 budget and Annexes 
(Attachment BB), with a 2023 budget of USD8,884,999.   
  
 
AGENDA ITEM 14  — ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS  
14.1 
Secretariat’s Corporate Plan 
487. 
WCPFC19 noted with appreciation the Updated Secretariat Corporate Plan (WCPFC19-
2022-IP17). 
 
14.2 
Appointment of the New Executive Director 
 
488. 
The Chair formally announced the appointment of Ms Rhea Moss-Christian as Executive 
Director of WCPFC. 
86  
  
14.3 
Election of Officers 
489. 
The Commission endorsed the appointment of Dr Josie Tamate (Niue) as Chair of the 
Commission and Mr Takumi Fukuda (Japan) as Vice-Chair of the Commission. 
490. 
The Commission made a number of other appointments to Commission positions 
commencing after the end of WCPFC19 (4 December 2022): 
i 
Ms Emily Crigler (United States) was appointed SC Vice-Chair; 
ii 
Mr Mat Kertesz (Australia) was appointed TCC Chair; 
iii 
Mr Ilkang Na (Korea) was appointed TCC Vice-Chair; 
iv 
Mr Masanori Miyahara (Japan) was appointed NC Chair; and 
v 
Mr Michael Tosatto (United States) was appointed NC Vice-Chair. 
 
491. 
In support of 2022 Intersessional activities, to be progressed electronically, the 
Commission confirmed the following: 
i 
Ms Neomai Ravitu (Fiji) would continue to chair the South Pacific Albacore 
Roadmap IWG; 
ii 
Dr Alex Kahl (United States) Mr. Felix Toa Ngwango (Vanuatu) would 
continue to co-chair the Transhipment Review IWG; 
iii 
Mr Jamel James (Federated States of Micronesia) would continue to chair the 
FAD Management Options IWG;  
iv 
Mr Harold Vilia (Solomon Islands) was appointed IWG-ROP Chair; 
v 
Ms Putuh Suadela (Indonesia) and Ms Sarah McAvinchey (New Zealand) 
would co-lead the intersessional work on improving labour standards for crews 
fishing boats; and 
vi 
Ms. Elizabeth O'Sullivan would lead work through the CMS IWG to develop 
corrective actions to encourage and incentivize CCM's compliance with the 
Commission's obligations. 
 
492. 
The Chair noted that the positions of ERandEMWG Chair, and CDS-IWG Chair remain 
vacant and that nominations for these positions would be invited intersessionally in 2023. 
 
14.4 
Future Meetings 
493. 
The Cook Islands offered to host WCPFC20 in Rarotonga from 4 to 8 December 2023, and stated 
it would provide a unique Polynesian experience. 
494. 
The Secretariat noted the higher costs for hosting an annual meeting in the Cooks Islands and would 
add an additional $65,000 to the annual meeting costs to the budget.  The Secretariat also noted those 
additional costs would be offset by increasing the drawdown on the Working Capital Fund by $65,000 so 
87  
  
that member contributions would not increase from the recommendations of FAC16 (WCPFC19-2022-
FAC16).  
495. 
The Commission agreed on the following meeting venues and dates: 
i 
WCPFC20 would be held in Rarotonga, Cook Islands from 4 to 8 December 
2023; 
ii 
SC19 would be held in Palau from 16 to 24 August, 2023; 
iii 
TCC19 would be held in Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia from 
Wednesday 20 September to Tuesday 26 September 2023; and 
vii 
NC19 would be held in Japan (venue and date to be advised)  
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 15  — OTHER MATTERS   
496. 
Dr. Graham Pilling (SPC) offered a tribute to the late Dr. Tony Lewis, who spent over four decades 
working in fisheries in the Pacific, and was head of SPC-OFP for fourteen years.  
497. 
WCPFC19 expressed its sincere condolences at the passing of Dr Tony Lewis, former 
head of the Oceanic Fisheries Programme of the Pacific Community and a significant contributor 
to WCPFC and the science of fisheries in the Pacific region. 
498. 
WCPFC19 expressed its sincere appreciation to the Chair of the Commission for her 
tireless work in guiding the work of the Commission over the last four years during the 
challenging period of the pandemic and two years of virtual meetings. 
499. 
WCPFC19 expressed its sincere appreciation to the outgoing Executive Director for his 
leadership of the WCPFC Secretariat over the last eight years and its best wishes for the future. 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 16  — SUMMARY REPORT OF THE WCPFC19  
500. 
The Chair outlined the process for adoption of the Summary Report for WCPFC19, with an 
Outcomes Document containing agreed decision points to be circulated to the Commission within seven 
working days following the close of the annual session, and the draft Summary Report to be provided as 
soon as possible. CCMs would be given thirty working days after circulation of the draft Summary Report 
to provide any changes. The complete Summary Report would be finalised intersessionally and posted on 
the Commission website and meeting participants would be advised accordingly.   
 
AGENDA ITEM 17  — CLOSE OF MEETING  
501. 
The Executive Director expressed his congratulations to the Commission for completing the tasks 
it set for itself in Vietnam. He stated that the Commission demonstrated once again that despite diversity 
and varied interests of its members it was able to rise to the occasion and delivered on key priorities. In 
particular, he noted the adoption of a management procedure for skipjack as a major milestone in progressing 
the implementation of the WCPFC harvest strategy workplan. He praised the skilful and strategic leadership 
88  
  
of the Chair in managing efficiently and effectively the deliberations at WCPFC19. He expressed his 
gratitude and appreciation to those who supported him in his tenure of eight years as Executive Director of 
the Commission, which would come to an end in March 2023. He explained his initial engagement with the 
Commission when he headed the Tuvalu Delegation to the multilateral high-level conference that negotiated 
the WCPFC Convention from 1997 to 2020. He thanked the Commission and its membership for entrusting 
him with the responsibility of heading the WCPFC Secretariat since March 2015, and reflected on the many 
achievements of the WCPFC over his tenure. He also thanked and acknowledged the Government of Tuvalu 
for its support for him, and the sterling leadership and guidance of the two Commission Chairs (Ms Rhea 
Moss-Christian and Ms Jung-re Riley Kim) that he worked with. He noted with gratitude the support and 
work of the Scientific Services Provider Team SPC-OFP, and the other services providers of the 
Commission FFA in terms of VMS services and ISC for scientific services for the NC.  He acknowledged 
with great admiration the dedication and commitment and support of his colleagues at the Secretariat 
including the Legal Adviser Dr Penny Riding and the Rapporteur Mr Mark Smaalders. 
502. 
The Commission Chair reflected on her involvement with the Commission and tenure as Chair. She 
reviewed the Commission’s achievements at WCPFC19, and acknowledged the hard work of all CCMs in 
making these possible, noting in particular the MP for skipjack. She noted the work of the leads for the small 
working groups during WCPFC19, and acknowledged the hard work of the outgoing Executive Director, 
the Secretariat staff, and the staff of the SPC-OFP. She welcomed the incoming Chair and Vice Chair of the 
Commission, the Chair and Vice Chair of TCC, and the newly appointed Vice-Chair of SC. She also 
welcomed the newly appointed Executive Director. She closed by offering her thanks to the Government of 
Vietnam for hosting the meeting in Da Nang.    
503. 
CCMs thanked the government of Vietnam for hosting WCPFC19 and acknowledged the Chair for 
her excellent work, and her service for management of fisheries. They also congratulated the incoming 
Chair, Dr. Josie Tamate. CCMs thanked the Executive Director for his years of service to the Commission, 
and congratulated the newly appointed Executive Director, Ms. Rhea Moss-Christian. They noted the 
Commission’s accomplishments at WCPFC19 and looked forward to WCPFC20 in the Cook Islands.  
504. 
The meeting closed at 7:18 pm on Tuesday, 03 December 2022 (Vietnam time).    
 
