Commission for the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the 
Western and Central Pacific Ocean 
 
 
Eleventh Regular Session 
 
1-5 December 2014 
 
Apia, Samoa 
 
 
 
SUMMARY REPORT
 
AGENDA  ITEM  1  -  OPENING OF MEETING 
 
1. 
The Eleventh Regular Session of the Commission for the Conservation and Management of 
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPFC11) took 
place from 1-5 December 2014 at Apia, Samoa.  
2. 
The following Members, and Participating Territories  attended WCPFC11: American 
Samoa, Australia, Canada, the People’s Republic of China, the Commonwealth of the 
Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI), the Cook Islands, the European Union (EU), the 
Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), Fiji, France, French Polynesia, Guam, Indonesia, 
Japan, Kiribati, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI), Nauru, 
New Caledonia, New Zealand, Niue, Palau, , Papua New Guinea (PNG), the Philippines, 
Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Chinese Taipei, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, the United States of 
America (USA), and Vanuatu.  
3. 
The following non-party countries attended WCPFC11 as Cooperating Non-Members 
(CNMs): Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Panama, Thailand and Vietnam. Liberia 
participated at WCPFC11 as an observer. 
4. 
Observers from the following governmental and inter-governmental organizations attended 
WCPFC11: Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA), the Pacific Islands Forum 
Secretariat (PIF), the Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA), the Secretariat of the Pacific 
Community (SPC), the Secretariat for the Pacific Regional Environment Programme 
(SPREP), the United Nations Environment Programme, and the United Nations Food and 
Agriculture Organisation (FAO).  
4 
 
5. 
Observers from the following non-governmental organizations attended WCPFC11: 
American Albacore Fishing Foundation, American Fisheries Research Foundation, 
American Tunaboat Association, Birdlife International, Conservation International, Earth 
Island Institute, Environment Hawaii, Greenpeace, International Environmental Law 
Project,, International Seafood Sustainability Foundation (ISSF), the Marine Stewardship 
Council (MSC), Organization for the Promotion of Responsible Tuna Fisheries (OPRT), 
Pacific Islands Tuna Industry Association (PITIA), the Pew Charitable Trusts, Tautai O-
Samoa Longline & Fishing Association, the United States-Japan Research Institute, and the 
World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF). 
6. 
 A list of all participants is attached as Attachment A.  
1.1 
Welcoming Addresses 
7. 
Faalavaau M. Perina Jacqueline Sila, government of Samoa, welcomed the Prime Minister 
of Samoa and Ministers of the government of Samoa, the WCPFC Chair, Dr Charles 
Karnella, the Interim-Executive Director, Dr Lara Manarangi-Trott, and delegations. 
8. 
A benediction was offered by Reverend Afamasaga Mautofu Fuimaono. 
9. 
On behalf of the government and people of Samoa, the Prime Minister of Samoa, the 
Honourable Tuilaepa Lupesoliai Sailele Malielegaoi, gave a warm welcome to attendees of 
this year’s annual session of the WCPFC (see Attachment B). He noted that the meeting 
of WCPFC11 was opportune, after the success of the 3rd UN International Conference on 
Small Island Developing States (SIDS) in Samoa in September, which saw more than 130 
countries and 100 organizations in attendance at the purpose-built and refurbished Faleata 
Sports Complex. The Prime Minister noted the importance Samoans place on sustainable 
management and strategic utilisation of their limited resources, and emphasized that 
fisheries were a main economic development opportunity available to SIDS. The Prime 
Minister urged participants to work together in the spirit of genuine and durable 
partnerships to ensure Pacific fish stocks remain healthy for current and future generations, 
including agreeing a strengthened measure for South Pacific albacore, a key target stock 
for Pacific islanders. The Prime Minister commented that compliance with CMMs and 
timely reporting remained important issues and noted that IUU fishing continues to 
threaten and undermine fisheries conservation efforts. Hard decisions needed to be made to 
ensure the long term conservation and systematic use of highly migratory fish stocks in the 
region, and to avoid mistakes made elsewhere in overexploiting fish stocks. The Prime 
Minister of Samoa emphasized that Samoa wished to make available its facilities in the 
future and wished delegates well in their deliberations. 
10. 
The Chair thanked the Prime Minster of Samoa for his words of wisdom. He acknowledged 
the attendance at WCPFC11 of ministers and dignitaries, including The Hon. Prime 
Minister of Samoa Tuilaepa Lupesoliai Sailele Malielegaoi, the Hon. Ulu o Tokelau 
Kuresa Nasau, the Hon. Deputy Prime Minister of Samoa Fonotoe Nuafesili Pierre Lauofo, 
Ministers of the Cabinet, Government of Samoa, the Hon. Elisala Pita, Minister for Works 
and Natural Resources, Tuvalu, the Hon. Mao Zeming, Minister for Fisheries & Marine 
Resource, Papua New Guinea, the Hon. Mona Ioane, Minister of Marine Resource, Cook 
Islands, the Hon. Billy Talagi, Minister of Natural Resources, Niue, the Hon. Sione 
Sangster Saulala, Minister of Agriculture, Food, Forests and Fisheries, Tonga, the Hon. 
Luwalhati Antonino, Chair of Mindanao Development Authority, Philippines, His 
Excellency Shane Jones, Ambassador for Pacific Economic Development, New Zealand. 
5 
 
The Chair also acknowledged Interim-Executive Director of the WCPFC, Dr Lara 
Manarangi-Trott, FFA Director General, James Movick and PNA Chief Executive Officer, 
Dr Transform Aqorau, WCPFC Secretariat staff, Reverend Afamasaga Mautofu Fuimaono, 
police, security and volunteers. The Chair remarked on the hospitality shown by Samoa 
and the excellent facilities. He noted that the Commission would this week continue the 
process of helping ensure that highly migratory marine fish species are properly managed 
so they will be available for participants’ descendants and their descendants, and that the 
Commission has to come together and work as partners and make accommodations on each 
side. 
11. 
The Chair opened the meeting at 10 AM on 1 December 2014. 
1.2 
Adoption of agenda 
12. 
The Chair advised that three suggested changes to the agenda were discussed at the Heads 
of Delegation meeting on 30 November: moving the Northern Committee (NC) 
deliberations (8.1) to Tuesday morning, to allow the NC Chair to meet his travel 
obligations; the Cook Islands withdrawing its proposal on EHSP (WCPFC11-2014-DP18) 
which removed Agenda item 10.10 from the agenda; and a report on the Kobe process 
added to the agenda at 13.4.  
13. 
The agenda WCPFC11-2014-02_rev4 was adopted with those amendments 
(Attachment C).  
1.3 
Meeting arrangements 
14. 
The Interim- Executive Director and Compliance Manager, Dr Lara Manarangi-Trott, 
identified the Secretariat staff in attendance at WCPFC11: Finance and Administration 
Manager Aaron Nighswander; Science Manager Dr SungKwon Soh; Assistant Compliance 
Manager 'Ana Taholo; Regional Observer Programme (ROP) Coordinator Karl Staisch; 
Information, Communication and Technology Manager Sam Taufao; Vessel Monitoring 
System (VMS) Manager Albert Carlot; Assistant Science Manager Anthony Beeching, 
GEF ABNJ Tuna Project Technical Coordinator-Sharks and Bycatch Dr Shelley Clarke, 
project management consultant Kerry Smith, Administrative Officer Lucille Martinez, 
Executive Assistant Arlene Takesy. In addition to Secretariat staff, participants included 
staff from SPC-OFP Dr John Hampton, Dr Shelton Harley, Dr Graeme Pilling and Dr 
Robert Scott, Third Management Objectives Workshop Facilitator Ian Cartwright, 
Rapporteur Dr Jane Broweleit, the five shortlisted interview candidates for the Executive 
Director position –Peter Flewelling, Feleti P. Teo, Dr Sachiko Tsuji and Dr David Wilson 
along with Dr SungKwon Soh - and the many Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of 
Fisheries and Faleata Sports Complex staff helping the Secretariat with the meeting 
arrangements. 
15. 
It was noted that David Angyal, WCPFC Legal Advisor, had taken ill on the journey to 
Samoa and was in hospital in Honolulu. He would not be in attendance at WCPFC11 and 
wishes for his speedy recovery were offered. 
16. 
The Interim-Executive Director noted logistical and administrative arrangements in place 
to support the meeting, including proposed times for a PNA, SPC, ISSF side meeting and a 
GEF ABNJ Sharks and Bycatch Consultation Committee Meeting, along with an evening 
function on 1 December 2014 at the invitation of the Prime Minister of Samoa. Interviews 
6 
 
to select the new WCPFC Executive Director were scheduled for the afternoon of 2 
December 2014, the second day of the meeting. Heads of delegations of Members and 
Participating Territories only would participate in those interviews. 
17. 
The Chair reminded member delegations to ensure the Secretariat received their 
credentials, to enable them to participate in negotiations. The Secretariat advised on 
facilities and processes for booking side rooms, power, printing and computer facilities and 
document management, and update arrangements for the public website and in-house 
meeting server.  
1.3.1 
 Small working groups 
18. 
The Chair informed WCPFC11 of his intention to continue the process used at recent 
meetings to introduce proposals early in the meeting to be worked on in small groups in the 
margins of the meeting. Issues related to the tropical tuna measure, including those within 
the measure which were scheduled to be addressed this year, as well as proposals for 
amendments to the measure, would be worked on as a single item in a small working group 
so as to not take up extensive amounts of time at the cost of time in plenary. Other small 
working groups would advance consideration of CNM applications, the Compliance 
Monitoring Review process, and responses to non-compliance. 
  
AGENDA  ITEM  2  -  MEMBERSHIP AND OTHER APPLICATIONS 
2.1 
Status of the Convention 
19. 
After thanking the government and people of Samoa for their hosting of WCPFC11, and 
the WCPFC Secretariat for their hard work preparing the meeting, the depository of the 
Convention, New Zealand, advised WCPFC11 that since its last report to the tenth regular 
session of the Commission in December 2013, New Zealand has not received notification 
of any instruments of ratification or accession to the Convention (WCPFC11-2014-06). 
2.2 
Applications for Observer status 
20. 
The Chair noted that an application for observer status from Liberia was discussed at the 
Heads of Delegation meeting on 30 November, without objection.  
21. 
WCPFC11 agreed to approve the application for observer status from Liberia for this 
meeting. 
2.3 
Applications for Cooperating Non-Member (CNM) status 
2.3.1 
TCC10 advice and recommendations and updates from Secretariat 
22. 
The TCC Chair, Rhea Moss-Christian noted that TCC had considered eight CNM 
applications for Cooperating Non-Member status for 2015, from Ecuador, El Salvador, 
Liberia, Mexico, Panama, Senegal, Thailand and Vietnam (WCPFC11-2014-08). A ninth 
application, from Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK), was received after the 
conclusion of TCC10. Ecuador, El Salvador and Vietnam attended TCC10. Belize had 
7 
 
advised WCPFC that they do not wish to be considered for Cooperating Non-Member 
renewal in 2015. 
23. 
TCC10 recommended that all eight applications be forwarded to WCPFC11 and that 
WCPFC11 take into consideration the Compliance Status of all CNM applicants in making 
its decision on the CNM applications and participatory rights (para 26(iv)). Some 
Members, CNMs and Participating Territories (CCMs) at TCC10 recommended that 
WCPFC11 agree that, in addition to this year’s financial contribution, CNMs should be 
required to make any past financial contributions that remain outstanding (para 26(vi)). A 
third recommendation is that if conditional grants of cooperating non-member status are 
given, that there be a clear process for how the final determination will be made (para 
26(vii)). TCC10 noted that three CNM applicants (Ecuador, El Salvador and Mexico) have 
expressed an interest in becoming full members and recommends that WCPFC11 consider 
whether to invite them to become Members (para 26(viii)). 
24. 
Of the eight applications for CNM status for 2015 (Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Mexico, 
Panama, Senegal, Thailand and Vietnam), gaps were noted for Mexico, Panama, Senegal, 
Thailand and Vietnam, as follows: 
 
Mexico: TCC10 noted there was no commitment made to a financial contribution, high 
seas boarding and inspection; Mexico does not have vessels operating in the area; SPC 
reports data gaps.  
 
Panama: submitted its Annual Reports 1 and 2 during TCC, so were not adequately 
assessed; were encouraged to submit earlier in future years; SPC receives some 
transshipment data, but reports that there may be gaps. 
 
Senegal: made no commitment to provide a financial contribution. 
 
Thailand: submits some transshipment data, but there may be gaps. 
 
Vietnam: is continuing to improve its data submission, but there may be gaps. 
25. 
DPRK’s application was not considered by TCC10. Since TCC10, data and information 
from Liberia, Senegal and DPRK has been received. DPRK provided some fishery-specific 
data. Additional information was made available to CCMs through the secure section of the 
WCPFC website.  
26. 
Japan stated that the over capacity problem in the purse seine fishery is one of the biggest 
problems for this Commission and CNMs should also seriously consider this. At 
WCPFC10, Japan had advised of the possible construction of 10 large purse seine vessels 
in Vietnam and requested Vietnam to oversee the ship building activities in its country. 
Japan also reminded the Commission that Vietnam had promised to convey the 
Commission’s concerns on overcapacity issue to its home government and report back and 
asked Vietnam to update the Commission on the situation in its country. 
27. 
One CCM acknowledged Ecuador, El Salvador and Mexico’s requests for membership, 
thanked them for their interest and highlighted that in the upcoming consideration of 
participatory rights, WCPFC shouldn’t allow excess capacity into the region. 
28. 
FFA members noted that two applications were submitted late. They stated that complete 
applications, in the template provided by the Secretariat, should be submitted on time. FFA 
members also supported TCC10's recommendation that compliance status should be taken 
into account in consideration of the granting of CNM status and participatory rights, and 
that CNMs should submit Annual Reports on time. FFA members noted that each year 
gaps have been noted in meeting the CNM criteria, yet CNM status is granted. Where 
8 
 
information is not provided, the application is incomplete and FFA members cannot agree 
to grant those applicants CNM status, though they are open to a 'conditional acceptance', 
provided the process for allowing CNM status intersessionally is clear, such as: (i) 
identifying the information/requirement gap; (ii) information/requirement is to be met or 
provided to the Executive Director by a certain date; (iii) the Executive Director advises 
CCMs and forwards the advice/information as appropriate; (iv) unless an objection is 
received by a certain date, conditional acceptance is lifted and CNM status is allowed; and 
(v) the Executive Director confirms this to all CCMs. FFA added that in setting dates under 
the process outlined above, the Commission should be flexible, depending on the 
magnitude and nature of the outstanding information. 
29. 
FFA members noted that a number of CNMs have not paid their assessed contributions, 
including for 2011-2014. FFA members stated that CNMs are to pay a contribution to the 
Commission which is 50% of the amount that would be payable if the CNM was a 
member, as agreed at WCPFC7. In 2014, the assessed contributions for five of the eight 
CNMs were less than the assessed contribution of any of the SIDS; those for the other three 
CNMs were still far less than those for several SIDS. Such contributions are to be used to 
reduce the assessed contributions in the year following receipt. FFA members expressed 
concern that some CNMs are failing to provide their assessed contributions and requested 
that CNM applicants with outstanding financial contributions make these payments at the 
earliest opportunity. If the contributions are not made at this meeting, FFA members stated 
they will not accept these CNM applications, though they would allow a conditional 
acceptance provided contributions are made by a certain date. 
30. 
The Chair queried the concept of conditional approval and asked how it would work, if a 
statement would be rendered along the lines of “the Commission approves CNM status for 
X country pending receipt of the following…” 
31. 
New Zealand, on behalf of FFA, recalled that last year a conditional acceptance status was 
provisional for Mexico and DPRK. A process where a status was offered provisionally, 
pending outstanding contributions being paid, would be acceptable. 
32. 
The EU sought further clarification from FFA members, stating that CNMs have to 
demonstrate their compliance status but contributions are not mandatory, so it should not 
be a formal requirement for granting or denying status. 
2.3.2 
Granting of CNM status for 2015 
Ecuador 
 
33. 
WCPFC11 agreed to approve the application for renewal of CNM status in 2015 for 
Ecuador.  
El Salvador 
 
34. 
WCPFC11 agreed to approve the application for renewal of CNM status in 2015 for 
El Salvador.  
Liberia 
 
35. 
WCPFC11 agreed to approve the application for CNM status in 2015 for Liberia.  
9 
 
 
36. 
FFA members requested a clarification on the process, noting that it had raised the issue of 
non-payment of contributions, and that those who have not paid their contributions should 
not become CNMs. They also restated concerns about bringing excess capacity into the 
region. 
37. 
The Chair suggested that for this to take effect, FFA members would need to vote ‘no’ for 
that particular CCM, unless it is agreed to grant conditional approval as FFA members had 
suggested. The Chair proposed that this and other issues be resolved in a small working 
group. The Chair noted that WCPFC11 had agreed to grant CNM status to the first three 
applicants considered and had not closed the discussion on Mexico’s application. If the 
group wanted to discuss the possibility of status provisional to certain conditions, the group 
could see how that works. In response to a clarification sought by a CCM about CNM 
status being met without the contribution being made, the Chair reminded participants that 
the decision to grant or not grant is the Commission’s and, although WCPFC has a 
procedure, this issue has come up two years in a row. Adopting a formal procedure may be 
necessary. 
38. 
The EU made the point that the contributions are voluntary, not a formal obligation.  
39. 
One CCM noted that the CMM reads: “shall include with its request an explicit 
commitment to make financial contribution… in accordance with section 18(2) of the 
Convention,” which has subsequently been qualified to a 50% contribution. This CCM 
stated that it wasn’t unreasonable to have such a condition in place. 
40. 
The Chair requested that a small group form to look at these issues, and reminded 
WCPFC11 that if there were issues with the three CNMs which had been approved, the 
group would need to formally undo those statuses. 
41. 
The TCC Chair offered further information on the CNM applicant countries: 
 
Ecuador: has paid 2013 and 2014 
 
El Salvador: has paid for 2014 
 
Liberia: made a commitment to provide a contribution 
 
Mexico: did not include an explicit commitment; did not pay in 2013 
 
Panama: has paid 2013 and 2014 
 
Senegal: did not include an explicit contribution; did not pay 2013 or 2014 
 
Thailand: paid for 2014; partial payment in 2013 
 
Vietnam: has paid for 2014 
 
DPRK: included explicit commitment to make a contribution but has not paid for 2014 
 
42. 
In response to a question from one CCM about whether Senegal was a CNM this year, the 
TCC Chair confirmed that Senegal was not a CNM this year; its application is for 2015. 
Senegal was a CNM for 2013 (and its contribution was then not paid). 
43. 
One CCM queried whether an applicant could be accepted as a CNM but the second step in 
the two-step process could be to effectively not grant any participatory rights.  
44. 
The TCC Chair noted that the process is to accept CNM status then determine participatory 
rights and confirmed that the financial contribution had not been discussed before to this 
extent in relation to the acceptance of their status. 
10 
 
Mexico 
 
45. 
Since Ecuador and El Salvador made contributions for 2014, the Chair advised WCPFC11 
that it may not need to revisit either of those cases. The Chair suspended discussion on 
Mexico’s application and continued to work through the list of CNM applicant countries. 
Panama 
 
46. 
In response to a question about the process being undertaken, the Chair noted that the 
group was suspending decisions on applicants which have not made a voluntary 
contribution and the small working group will advise WCPFC11 how best to deal with 
their applications. He reminded delegations that the procedure is not explicit, but that 
Panama has paid.  
47. 
WCPFC11 agreed to approve the application for renewal of CNM status in 2015 for 
Panama. 
Thailand 
 
48. 
The Chair noted that Thailand has paid for 2014, but not in full for 2013.  
49. 
WCPFC11 agreed to approve the application for renewal of CNM status in 2015 for 
Thailand. 
Vietnam 
 
50. 
Japan reiterated its request that the Commission be updated by Vietnam on its shipbuilding, 
explaining that it wished for this update before granting Vietnam CNM status.  
51. 
Vietnam confirmed that it could provide information by the end of this week. 
52. 
The Chair suspended discussion on Vietnam’s CNM status. 
53. 
The Chair noted that several countries had raised concerns and a small working group 
would discuss and recommend to the Commission the nature of the participatory rights of 
the several countries that had been granted CNM status. The issues with the other countries 
do not fall neatly within the Commission’s procedures, including the notion of conditional 
acceptance. The small working group could discuss how to treat the CNM status for those 
countries with contributions outstanding and report back with a general recommendation 
on whether or not to grant CNM status. If affirmative, the small working group would then 
discuss participatory rights and also perhaps improvements to the process. 
54. 
One CCM noted there was a clear need to consider these issues as a whole, further noting 
there was some confusion about how to proceed.  
55. 
New Zealand accepted the role of Chair of the small working group looking at CNM 
participatory rights and related matters. 
56. 
The Chair recalled that one CCM had raised the issue of Ecuador, El Salvador and Mexico 
and whether the Commission should issue invitations to these countries to become 
members.  
11 
 
57. 
The EU noted that it is better in general when CNMs become full members. This CCM 
views CNM status as a ‘transition’ status of sorts, on the way to having full rights, 
commitments and obligations. This CCM stressed that each application should be 
examined on its own merit.  
58. 
Some CCMs noted that these countries are also members of IATTC and since that 
organisation shares fish stocks and an overlap area with WCPFC, it would be a positive 
development if they became members. 
59. 
Several CCMs noted the problem of overcapacity, which WCPFC should consider when 
thinking about new members, and WCPFC may not be in a position to accept new 
members. 
60. 
The Chair noted the lack of consensus on the issue and sought agreement that the 
Secretariat should develop a procedure for the next meeting around accepting new 
members. One CCM supported the suggestion. 
61. 
One CCM requested clarification about this tasking of the Secretariat, noting that the 
Convention is clear: once there is consensus, non-members can be invited to become 
members. This CCM stated that this process worked quite well. 
62. 
One CCM noted that while it too was concerned about capacity, it was an assumption that 
these countries would bring purse seiners into the region, or even capacity, and the group 
should not pass up an opportunity to engage these countries on management and improving 
sustainability. Having them within the Commission brings more engagement and there 
should be a dialogue about why they want to be members of the Commission. 
63. 
One CCM suggested that establishing pre-conditions could be a solution; committing to a 
capacity reduction to become a full member. 
64. 
The EU stated that these countries’ motivations must be examined on their merit and they 
should be invited to explain what they see as their contribution to WCPFC. 
65. 
One CCM noted that the issue was one of RFMOs harmonizing management in the region. 
66. 
The Chair suspended discussion on this issue to accommodate discussions in the margins 
through the small working group established to prepare draft decisions points for 
consideration by WCPFC11 relevant to any reviews of Cooperating Non-Member 
participatory limits.  
67. 
After consultations, on 5 December Mr Shannon Tau (New Zealand) presented the CNM 
SWG report (WCPFC11-2014-28).  
Cooperating Non-Members - Report by Small Working Group 
 
68. 
At the Chair’s direction a small working group was established to consider the applications 
of CNMs and, where a decision to renew status was proposed, to assess associated 
participatory rights. Further, the group was directed to consider the concept of conditional 
acceptance raised in plenary and the process of progression of CNM applications generally. 
12 
 
69. 
Framework documents for the working group were CMM 2009-11 and Secretariat paper 
WCPFC11-2014-08. The group also referred to TCC10’s recommendations in the CNM 
section of the TCC10 Summary Report and the further recommendations highlighted by 
the TCC Chair during plenary session. These recommendations are set out below for 
reference. 
70. 
A decision on CNM status had already been made with regard to several of the applicants 
before the SWG commenced. Those applicants were Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, 
Panama, and Thailand. It was decided that where a decision to grant CNM status had 
already been made this would not be readdressed. TCC’s recommendations would still be 
considered though where, for example, information gaps had been identified and this was 
considered relevant for the subsequent granting of participatory rights. 
71. 
This left the DPRK, Mexico, Senegal, and Vietnam for the group to consider in relation to 
granting CNM status as issues were raised regarding these applications during plenary 
session. 
72. 
The small working group reviewed: 
 
TCC10’s recommendations and requests regarding individual CNM applications; 
 
Where necessary, information provided by applicants subsequent to TCC10; 
 
Information provided during the course of the working group meeting.  
 
73. 
The group noted with appreciation the attendance and participation of Ecuador, El 
Salvador, Liberia, Mexico, Panama and Vietnam in the SWG’s discussions and encouraged 
other CNM applicants to attend in the future.  
74. 
The group did not consider the issue of some CNM applicants indicating they would like to 
become full Members of the Commission. 
Relevant TCC Recommendations 
 
75. 
TCC10 provided the following decisions and recommendations to WCPFC11: 
i. TCC10 has reviewed the following CNM applications and is forwarding them to 
WCPFC11 for consideration: Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Mexico, Panama, Senegal, 
Thailand and Vietnam. 
ii. TCC10 thanked the Secretariat for the development of the CNM application template 
which assisted the process greatly. 
iii. TCC10 notes with appreciation the attendance and participation of Ecuador, El 
Salvador, Thailand and Vietnam at this year’s meeting and encourages other CNM 
applicants to attend TCC meetings in the future. 
iv. TCC10 recommends that WCPFC11 take into consideration the Compliance Status of 
all CNM applicants in making its decision on the CNM applications and participatory 
rights. Furthermore, TCC10 recommends that CNM applicants provide any information 
requested during the CMS process 30 days in advance of WCPFC11. 
v. Some CCMs noted their strong reservations in forwarding the applications of Panama, 
Mexico and Senegal to WCPFC11 for consideration due to the failure to submit a 
complete and timely Annual Report or failure to make a commitment to make a financial 
contribution. 
vi. Some CCMs recommended that WCPFC11 agree that, in addition to this year’s 
financial contribution, CNMs should be required to make any past financial contributions 
that remain outstanding. 
13 
 
vii. TCC10 recommends to WCPFC11 that if conditional grants of cooperating non-
member status are given, that there be a clear process for how the final determination will 
be made. 
viii. TCC10 notes that three CNM applicants (Ecuador, El Salvador and Mexico) have 
expressed an interest in becoming full members and recommends that WCPFC11 
consider whether to invite them to become members. 
ix. TCC10 notes the following gaps in the applications for individual applicants and 
encourages applicants to rectify them if possible by WCPFC11: 
a. Mexico – TCC10 notes that Mexico has not provided a commitment to make a 
financial contribution. TCC10 further notes that Mexico has not agreed to accept 
High Seas Boardings and Inspections, however, Mexico currently has no vessels 
operating in the Convention Area. In addition, SPC noted that there may be some 
remaining data gaps in Mexico’s historical data. 
b. Panama – TCC10 noted that Panama submitted its Annual Report Part I and II 
during TCC and consequently it was not able to be assessed, and strongly 
encourages it to submit its Annual Reports on time in future years. SPC notes 
that it is receiving some transshipment data from Panama, but believes there 
remain some gaps in these data. 
c. Senegal – TCC10 notes that Senegal has not provided a commitment to make a 
financial contribution. 
d. Thailand - SPC notes that it is receiving some transshipment data from 
Thailand, but believes there remain some gaps in these data. 
e. Vietnam – SPC notes with appreciation the continuing improvement in data 
submission by Vietnam, but notes there remain some gaps in logbook data. 
 
76. 
Further recommendations identified by the TCC Chair are referred to below. 
According Cooperating Non-Member Status 
 
77. 
As above, status for Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Panama, and Thailand was decided in 
plenary.  
78. 
Discussion was held around the nature of the payment commitment set out in para 2(g) of 
CNM 2009-11. The group did not form a view on whether the requirement was mandatory 
and it was observed that while the Commission has to have regard to the requirements set 
out in the measure, non-compliance with these requirements by a CNM was not necessarily 
conclusive for the Commission determination which retained a discretion in this regard.  
79. 
Members of the group held different views on whether the requirement was to simply 
provide a commitment or to actually pay pursuant to this commitment. 
80. 
In relation to process generally, there was discussion that an incomplete application did not 
necessarily lead to a recommendation of the SWG that a CNM application not be accepted 
and also required an assessment as to whether the reason for, or nature of, incompleteness 
warranted such a recommendation. 
81. 
The group discussed paragraph 8 of CMM 2009-11 which states that, “The Commission 
shall accord CNM status on an annual basis. It may renew the CNM status subject to a 
review of the CNM’s compliance with the Convention’s objectives and requirements.” 
82. 
The concept of conditional acceptance was also discussed by the group. 
14 
 
83. 
The group noted TCC’s recommendation to WCPFC11 that if conditional grants of 
cooperating non-member status are given, that there be a clear process for how the final 
determination will be made (this report para 75(vii)). 
84. 
The concept as relayed in plenary was presented to the group and is summarised below. 
85. 
Members of the group were open to the concept of ‘conditional acceptance’ provided that 
the process for allowing CNM status intersessionally is clear, such as: 
(i) 
clearly identifying the information/requirement gap;  
(ii) 
that information or requirement is to be met or provided to the ED by a certain 
date; 
(iii) 
the ED advises all CCMs, and forwards the advice/information as appropriate; 
(iv) 
unless an objection is received within a certain date of receipt of the ED’s letter, 
conditional acceptance is lifted and CNM status is allowed; and 
(v) 
the ED confirms this to all CCMs. 
 
86. 
This approach was endorsed by the group noting that the clarity of obligation was 
important for this process to work effectively and that conditional acceptance should be 
avoided where possible through the applicant fulfilling all relevant obligations in advance 
of the Commission. 
DPRK 
 
87. 
The small working group noted that DPRK’s application was received after TCC and 
therefore was not able to be assessed by TCC. The application was also not in the template 
form provided by the Secretariat and no representative from DPRK was in attendance at 
the SWG. The group recommended that the Commission not accept the DPRK application 
in light of these factors. 
88. 
WCPFC11 did not accept the application for renewal of CNM status in 2015 from 
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK). 
Mexico  
 
89. 
The group considered Mexico’s application incomplete in that it didn’t provide an explicit 
commitment to make a financial contribution or to accept high seas boarding and 
inspection but noted this was not necessarily conclusive.  
90. 
Mexico was a participant in the small working group. Mexico advised that they continue to 
have national legislation which does not allow high seas boarding and inspection or the 
attribution of budget for financial contribution where Mexico is not a full member of the 
Commission.  
91. 
The issue of whether commitment or actual payment was necessary was discussed in 
relation to Mexico’s application. An aspect of discussion was whether imposing a 
condition of payment in Mexico’s national law circumstance was appropriate. An 
indication was provided by Mexico that payment of any kind was unlikely but that it would 
investigate the possibility of a voluntary payment. 
92. 
Mexico noted that it did not allow high seas boarding and inspection for any of its vessels 
worldwide but stated that were it to have a vessel presence in the WCPFC it would need to 
15 
 
address this issue. On this basis Mexico stated that until this issue was resolved it would 
not seek to have a vessel presence in the Convention area. The SWG recommended that the 
Commission ask Mexico to investigate the possibility of a voluntary payment. Noting 
Mexico’s national laws position and its lack of vessel presence for 2015, this would not be 
a condition on Mexico’s CNM status but a request to be met if at all possible. 
93. 
Taking the above into account, the group provided a recommendation for granting of CNM 
status to Mexico which was accepted by the Commission.  
94. 
Japan reminded the Commission that at TCC10 some CCMs made the point that CNMs 
must pay a contribution to the Commission commensurate with the benefits they receive 
from the fishery and should share the costs of managing and conserving it (para 23 of the 
TCC10 report).  
95. 
WCPFC11 agreed to approve the application for renewal of CNM status in 2015 from 
Mexico, on the understanding that the Secretariat will write a letter to Mexico 
advising that Mexico’s non-payment of any financial contribution generated extensive 
discussion at WCPFC11. Some CCMs noted their strong concern at the unfairness for 
SIDS CCMs and other CNMs due to this non-payment and those CCMs did not 
consider the lack of presence of any Mexico vessels to justify non-payment. Those 
CCMs also noted that if this concern is not addressed before Mexico’s next 
application for CNM status any such application would not be supported by those 
CCMs. 
96. 
New Zealand offered to draft this letter for the Secretariat. 
Senegal 
 
97. 
The group considered Senegal’s application incomplete in that it didn’t provide an explicit 
commitment to make a financial contribution but noted this was not necessarily conclusive.  
98. 
The group recommended that the Commission grant Senegal CNM status conditional upon 
payment of financial contribution of its 2015 assessed amount by 90 days after 15 January 
2015. It was noted that Senegal are requesting a small longline fishing presence as per 
previous years.  
99. 
The EU made a point of clarification, noting that CCMs had not come to agreement 
whether a financial contribution was a condition. The EU recalled that some CCMs did not 
take that view, while the report wording implies there was a conclusion. For Mexico, it was 
one of the elements taken into consideration, and for Senegal it is mentioned.  
100. The CNM SWG Chair confirmed the group did not form a final view, and clarified that the 
CNM status was not premised on whether or not a financial contribution was mandatory. 
Delegates were referred to para 8 of the CMM, which provides for the Commission to 
accord CNM status on an annual basis and may renew the CNM status subject to a review 
of the CNM’s compliance with the Convention’s objectives and requirements. This gave 
the Commission a broad mandate in this regard. The CNM SWG Chair noted that Senegal 
is seeking a fishing presence and to receive a benefit from the fishery. In response to a 
query from the EU as to the decision-making process, the CNM SWG Chair noted that the 
contribution wasn’t the only basis for the decision. 
16 
 
101. One CCM asked about the contribution amount assigned to Senegal, and noted that it 
shared the EU’s concern about disparate treatment. This CCM urged the SWG to ensure a 
fair, consistent approach when looking at this issue in the future. 
102. The CNM SWG Chair advised that the contribution amount for Senegal would be assessed 
by the Secretariat for 2015 and would presumably be similar to the amounts assessed in 
2013 of USD13,537, in 2012 of USD11,568 and 2011 of USD13,686. 
103. Canada acknowledged the difficulty for some CNM applicants to provide a financial 
contribution, though noting that Senegal will receive financial benefits from the fishery. 
This CCM observed that the measure is clear on providing a commitment to make a 
financial contribution, as opposed to making that financial contribution and cautioned that 
making approval conditional appears to make the financial contribution mandatory. This 
view was supported by some other CCMs. 
104. The Chair suggested the Commission consider modifying the measure next year or the year 
after, to have greater clarity around whether the contribution was ‘voluntary’ or ‘required’. 
105. Tuvalu stated that it, like most other FFA countries, manages to make a contribution even 
though many FFA members don’t have any flagged vessels. This CCM stated that until the 
contributions are paid, the applicants should not be granted CNM status. 
106. The EU expressed the view that if contributions are mandatory, that condition should be 
clarified somewhere, in the CMM or by adopting an interpretive rule, otherwise it could be 
arbitrary. The EU suggested this could be done next year. 
107. The Chair suggested including the issue on the agenda for WCPFC12.  
108. The CNM SWG Chair noted that Senegal’s participation in the fishery was not the only 
factor the group considered, and advised that the initial position from some members was 
to not support the CNM status. However, as a compromise, they could support it this year. 
109. One CCM took the view that CNMs should pay a contribution to the Commission 
compensatory with the benefit received from the fishery. 
110. RMI stated for the record that if the issue is to be reviewed, it would like it reviewed in the 
light of implications on SIDS relating to both financial and fishing opportunities. 
111. WCPFC11 agreed to approve the application for renewal of CNM status in 2015 for 
Senegal, on the condition that it pays its assessed contribution for 2015 by 90 days 
after 15 January 2015. 
Vietnam 
 
112. The issue around capacity was resolved with Japan and the small working group 
recommended Vietnam be granted CNM status. Vietnam will present to the Commission 
the result of the investigation on the capacity issue raised by Japan. 
113. Vietnam informed the Commission that six vessels were completed between 2010 and 
2013 and a further one vessel last month. All vessels are currently operating in the Indian 
Ocean. One further vessel is being constructed, scheduled for 2015 delivery. It is not clear 
17 
 
yet where the vessel will be operating. There are no other contracts for the construction of 
further large-scale tuna fishing vessels in Vietnam. Vietnam noted that a report had been 
requested at future Commission meetings on the construction of large-scale tuna fishing 
vessels in Vietnam, and Vietnam will be happy to do this. Vietnam took the view that this 
should not be part of the procedure for the granting CNM status. 
114. Japan acknowledged Vietnam’s report, and expressed appreciation for Vietnam’s 
commitment to reporting to WCPFC on further constructions in the future. Noting that the 
new vessel was ordered by a French company, Japan asked EU to take action to guide the 
company that its new vessel shall operate in the Convention Area without increasing total 
capacity of purse seine in the area.  
2.3.3 
Participatory rights 
115. The group noted TCC’s recommendation that that WCPFC11 take into consideration the 
Compliance Status of all CNM applicants in making its decision on the CNM applications 
and participatory rights (TCC10 summary report para 26(iv)) and the point that was made 
that participatory rights of CNMs need to be considered against the recognition of wider 
participation rights of SIDS members in the Commission. It was observed that capacity 
management of purse seiners needs to be considered, recalling the Commission’s concerns 
on capacity. 
116. In accordance with the WCPF Convention and its conservation and management measures 
and resolutions, the following limits apply to the participatory rights of Cooperating Non-
Members (CNMs) for fisheries in the high seas within the WCPFC Convention Area. In 
addition, unless otherwise specified below, CNMs may fish in waters under their national 
jurisdiction or other CCMs national jurisdiction, in accordance with appropriate bilateral 
arrangements. Such CNMs shall ensure vessels flying their flags comply with all 
provisions of the WCPF Convention and the WCPFC conservation and management 
measures. In addition, CNM vessels will be placed on the WCPFC Record of Fishing 
Vessels (WCPFC RFV). CCMs shall ensure that CNM fishing activities that are conducted 
in waters under their national jurisdiction in accordance with bilateral arrangements are 
consistent with all relevant conservation and management measures and provisions of the 
WCPF Convention. Renewal of CNM status by the Commission will be conditional on full 
compliance with the national laws and regulations of any licensing CCM, and all 
conservation and management measures and provisions of the WCPF Convention. CCMs 
shall identify any violations by vessels flagged to a CNM and report on any investigations 
of such violations to the TCC. 
117. The CNMs identified below provide assurances that they will comply with all requests 
from Commission Members for information and documentation to investigate cases of 
possible illegal fishing. 
118. The Commission advised CNMs to ensure that they meet the deadline for submission of 
applications for CNM status and meet all the obligations contained in CMM 2009-11. The 
Commission noted that failure to meet the above requirements could prejudice the future 
granting or renewal of CNM status. 
119. The Commission noted TCC’s recommendation that WCPFC11 take into consideration the 
Compliance Status of all CNM applicants in making its decision on the CNM applications 
and participatory rights (TCC10 summary report para 26(iv)) and the point made at the 
18 
 
SWG that participatory rights of CNMs need to be considered against the wider 
participation rights of SIDS members. 
WCPFC/IATTC Overlap Area 
 
120. In accordance with the decision of WCPFC9 regarding the management of the overlap area 
south of 4˚S and between 130˚W and 150˚W, vessels flagged to Ecuador, El Salvador and 
Mexico will be governed by the IATTC when fishing in the overlap area. Accordingly, the 
participatory rights for, Ecuador, El Salvador and Mexico below apply to the WCPFC 
Convention Area excluding the overlap area. 
121. In accordance with the Data Exchange MOU agreed by both Commissions, fishing vessels 
flying the flag of a member of either the IATTC or WCPFC shall cooperate with the 
RFMO to which they are not a member by voluntarily providing operational catch and 
effort data for its fishing activities for highly migratory species in the overlap area. 
122. For the purpose of investigation of possible IUU fishing activities and consistent with 
international and domestic laws, vessels flying the flag of a CNM that is a Contracting 
Party to the IATTC will cooperate with those coastal State members of the WCPFC whose 
EEZs occur in the overlap area by voluntarily providing VMS reports (date, time and 
position) to those coastal States when operating in the overlap area. 
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) 
 
123. As the group did not consider DPRK’s application should be accepted by the Commission, 
participatory rights were not considered or recommended. 
Ecuador 
 
124. The SWG noted Ecuador’s non-compliant status from TCC10 and encouraged Ecuador to 
aim for full compliance in 2015.  
125. The group noted WCPFC11’s approval of the application for renewal of CNM status by 
Ecuador and provided a recommendation for participatory rights which was accepted by 
the Commission. 
126. WCPFC11 agreed that Ecuador’s participatory rights for fishing in the WCPO are 
limited to purse seine fishing, with no participatory rights for fishing on the high seas 
for highly migratory fish stocks in the Convention Area. Any introduction of purse 
seine fishing capacity is to be in accordance with paragraph 12 of CMM 2009-11 and 
CMM 2013-01 or its replacement measure.  
El Salvador 
 
127. The SWG noted El Salvador’s non-compliant status from TCC10 and encouraged El 
Salvador to aim for full compliance in 2015.  
128. The group noted WCPFC11’s approval of the application for renewal of CNM status by El 
Salvador and provided a recommendation for participatory rights which was accepted by 
the Commission. 
19 
 
129. Japan stated its view that Ecuador and El Salvador shall not increase the number of purse 
seine vessels with its flag operating in the Convention Area above the level of 31 
December 2012.  
130. WCPFC11 agreed that the participatory rights of El Salvador for fishing in the 
WCPO are limited to purse seine fishing only. The total level of effort by purse seine 
vessels of El Salvador on the high seas shall not exceed 29 days in the Convention 
Area. Any introduction of purse seine fishing capacity is to be in accordance with 
paragraph 12 of CMM 2009-11 and CMM 2013-01 or its replacement measure.  
Liberia 
 
131. The group noted WCPFC11’s approval of the application for CNM status by Liberia and 
provided a recommendation for participatory rights which was accepted by the 
Commission. 
132. WCPFC11 agreed that the participatory rights of Liberia are limited to reefer vessels 
to engage in transshipment activities, and bunker and supply vessels to support 
fishing vessels in the Convention area. 
Mexico 
 
133. The SWG noted Mexico’s compliant status from TCC10.  
134. The SWG recommended that the Commission ask SPC to further identify the remaining 
gaps in historical data identified at TCC10 and request that Mexico provide this to the 
Secretariat, if possible.  
135. The group recommended that WCPFC11 approve the application for renewal of CNM 
status by Mexico and provided a recommendation for participatory rights which was 
accepted by the Commission. 
136. WCPFC11 noted that Mexico has participated in the work of the Northern 
Committee (NC) at NC 8, 9 and 10 and, noting the need for cooperation with the work 
of the NC particularly in regard to Pacific bluefin tuna, encouraged Mexico to 
continue to participate in the NC. Mexico does not intend to have a vessel presence in 
2015. Any future introduction of purse seine fishing capacity is to be in accordance 
with paragraph 12 of CMM 2009-11 and CMM 2013-01 or its replacement measure. 
Panama 
 
137. The SWG noted Panama’s non-compliant status from TCC10 and encouraged Panama to 
aim for full compliance in 2015.  
138. The group noted that Panama submitted its Annual Report Part 1 and 2 during TCC and 
consequently it was not able to be assessed, and that TCC10 strongly encouraged it to 
submit its Annual Reports on time in future years. SPC notes that it is receiving some 
transshipment data from Panama, but believes there remain some gaps in these data. 
139. The group asked the Commission to strongly encourage Panama to provide its reports as 
above and recommended that the Commission request that SPC/Secretariat further identify 
20 
 
the transhipment data gap and request that this information be provided by Panama to the 
Secretariat, if possible. 
140. The group noted WCPFC11’s approval of the application for renewal of CNM status by 
Panama and provided a recommendation for participatory rights which was accepted by the 
Commission. 
141. WCPFC11 agreed that the participatory rights of Panama in the WCPO are limited 
to the provision of carrier and bunker vessels. 
Senegal 
 
142. The SWG noted Senegal’s non-compliant status from TCC9 and encouraged Senegal to 
aim for full compliance in 2015.  
143. The group noted WCPFC11’s conditional approval for renewal of CNM status by Senegal 
and provided a recommendation for participatory rights which was accepted by the 
Commission. 
144. WCPFC11 agreed that the participatory rights of Senegal be limited to one 
Senegalese longline vessel to be authorised to fish in the Convention area. Any 
introduction of fishing capacity is to be in accordance with paragraph 12 of CMM 
2009-11 and CMM 2013-01 or its replacement measure.  
Thailand 
 
145. The SWG noted Thailand’s non-compliant status from TCC10 and encouraged Thailand to 
aim for full compliance in 2015.  
146. The SWG recommended that the Commission ask SPC to further identify the missing 
transhipment data identified at TCC10 and request that these data are provided by Thailand 
to the Secretariat, if possible. 
147. The group noted WCPFC11’s approval of the application for renewal of CNM status by 
Thailand and provided a recommendation for participatory rights which was accepted by 
the Commission. 
148. WCPFC11 noted the need for cooperation between Thailand and the Commission 
and the commitment from Thailand to provide data from canneries located in 
Thailand to assist in the work of the Commission. WCPFC11 agreed to grant CNM 
status to Thailand for 2015 on the understanding that Thailand will cooperate fully 
with the Commission in the acquisition and exchange of fishery information and data. 
The Commission notes the provision of data from Thai canneries and encourages 
Thailand to continue to cooperate with the Commission to improve the acquisition 
and exchange of fishery information and data. The participatory rights of Thailand in 
the WCPO are limited to the provision of carrier and bunker vessels only. 
Vietnam 
 
149. The SWG noted Vietnam’s non-compliant status from TCC10 and encouraged Vietnam to 
aim for full compliance in 2015.  
21 
 
150. The SWG recommended that the Commission ask SPC to further identify the missing 
logbook data identified at TCC10 and request that these data are provided by Vietnam to 
the Secretariat, if possible. Vietnam noted that its fishing activities only occurred in its own 
waters outside the Convention area but that it was prepared in the interests of the 
Commission to make the data available, if possible. 
151. The group recommended that WCPFC11 approve the application for renewal of CNM 
status by Vietnam and provided a recommendation for participatory rights which was 
accepted by the Commission. 
152. WCPFC11 noted the need for continued cooperation between Vietnam and the 
Commission to achieve compatibility of fisheries management and conservation, as 
well as on the acquisition and exchange of fishery information and data, for which 
Vietnam would require assistance. WCPFC11 agreed to approve the application for 
renewal of CNM status in 2015 from Vietnam. The Commission notes the significant 
improvements in the collection and provision of data from Vietnam fisheries through 
the GEF WPEA project, administered by the WCPFC and encourages Vietnam to 
continue to cooperate with the Commission to improve the acquisition and exchange 
of fishery information and data. The participatory rights of Vietnam in the WCPO 
are limited to the provision of carrier and bunker vessels only. 
General Process 
 
153. The group recommended that a more directive and particularised letter from the Secretariat 
be provided to a CNM applicant after TCC where an incomplete application had been 
identified. For example, that the nature of any data gap be set out more clearly. Also, there 
was a suggestion that TCC be more directive in relation to consequences of failure to 
provide such information. For example, that TCC would recommend an application be 
viewed less positively by the Commission if the required information were not to be 
provided.  
154. WCPFC11 accepted the recommendation from the CNM SWG that a more directive 
and particularised letter from the Secretariat be provided to a CNM applicant after 
TCC where an incomplete application had been identified. 
 
AGENDA  ITEM  3  -  EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND CCM REPORTS 
3.1 
Report of the Executive Director on the work on the Commission 
155. Dr Lara Manarangi-Trott, Interim-Executive Director of the WCPFC Secretariat, presented 
a report on the work of the Commission for 2014 (WCPFC11-2014-09), offering apologies 
that the report wasn’t provided in the minimum required time under the rules of procedure. 
Several key outcomes for the Secretariat in 2014 were reported, including the financial 
accounts being responsibly managed, the Secretariat working actively in the local 
community to promote the Commission and its work, a number of community programs 
and initiatives, which were well received, and Secretariat staff volunteering their personal 
time to assist with preparation for the Micronesian Games. SPC conducted a number of 
new stock assessments, activities under the WPEA project have continued through 2014 
with inception workshops for that project, the buildings and surrounds are in good 
22 
 
condition and well maintained, and on 25 October the Commission signed an execution 
agreement with the FAO for a package of work designed to mitigate adverse impacts of 
bycatch in global tuna fisheries, which will continue through to early 2019. Dr Shelley 
Clarke has been appointed the GEF ABNJ Tuna Project Coordinator – Sharks and Bycatch. 
The work will facilitate collaborative work between IATTC, WCPFC and FAO in the areas 
of sharks and bycatch. Compliance and information management activities by the 
Secretariat continued, with significant work building and supporting the Commission’s 
CMS, including a full online system this year, generating a draft compliance report and 
following the compliance process all the way through TCC and the annual meeting. 
Implementation of RFV SSPs and the creation and delivery of a publicly available and 
fully searchable RFV. The Commission has continued to have interactions with 
organizations in the region and beyond and, as in other years, prepared for and held SC, 
NC, TCC meetings and a number of workshops. The Interim-Executive Director drew 
attention to two staffing matters that the Secretariat is required in accordance with the staff 
regulations to inform the Commission:  the re-appointment of the WCPFC Science 
Manager, Dr Sung-Kwon Soh, who regained the position through an open recruitment 
process, and the Observer Programme Coordinator being advertised this year but the 
outgoing Executive Director pausing recruitment for that position until a new Executive 
Director was appointed. The Secretariat paper details various contracts and consultancies, 
as well as intersessional activities. 
156. On behalf of the Commission Secretariat, the Interim-Executive Director acknowledged the 
excellent work outgoing Executive Director Professor Glenn Hurry did in support of the 
Commission. On behalf of the Secretariat she offered him the very best in his next 
ventures. The Chair observed that the Commission was lucky to have him. 
157. FSM expressed sincere appreciation to the outgoing Executive Director for his excellent 
leadership and for working closely with the people and government of FSM to improve 
understanding of the work the Commission does for the region. FSM gave special mention 
to the Secretariat’s support for the Micronesian Games, and for the continued support and 
assistance provided to FSM with entry of their observer data at the Secretariat.  
3.2 
Statements of CCMs 
158. The Chair invited WCPFC11 participants to make brief opening statements. 
159. His Excellency Shane Jones, New Zealand Ambassador for Pacific Economic 
Development, conveyed three key messages to the Commission: 
 
the significance of fisheries resources in the Pacific region, especially to SIDS; 
 
the imperative of an effective and functioning Commission to achieve regional 
conservation outcomes and the need for the Commission to be a global leader in this 
regard; and 
 
key priorities for this meeting were the need for high quality and regular data to ensure 
well informed stock assessments and the effective management of the fishery. 
New Zealand places a high priority on the management and development of fisheries 
resources and high quality and timely data. This CCM noted their industry’s presence in 
the fishery, which needs national stocks to remain viable. New Zealand recalled that 
delegations enjoyed discussions in Samoa on economic development of SIDS and the need 
for partnerships; fisheries are almost the sole resource of some Pacific Island nations. 
New Zealand reminded delegates that it is essential to confront harmful subsidies in other 
23 
 
international fora, noting that New Zealand has stripped subsidies from industry. This 
region has some of the ocean’s healthiest stocks, but the Commission needs to deliver 
benefits to resource owners and certainty to industry. New Zealand confirmed its key 
priorities for the Commission meeting included the operational data proposal, the harvest 
strategies proposal outlining the need for harvest control rules and target reference points, 
and the proposal for better management of South Pacific albacore. New Zealand noted that 
the Tokelau Arrangement is important initiative which can be built on year after year, and 
expressed the hope that all other CCMs will embrace the spirit of this agreement and 
commit to the South Pacific albacore measure proposed at this Commission meeting. 
160. Hon Lenatai Victor Faafoi Tamapua, Associate Minister, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Fisheries, noted that Samoa takes its obligations very seriously, as reflected in its CMR. 
Samoa is experiencing a decline, especially in South Pacific albacore, due to a ramp up in 
longline effort in the Convention area and a lack of robust controls. The fishery is in 
jeopardy and Samoa called for urgent help. Samoa updated the Commission that it had 
declared limits for purse seine fishing and sought the support of the Commission and 
members to fulfill this aspiration. This CCM expressed its commitment for South Pacific 
albacore limits and FFA members’ CMM for South Pacific albacore. This fishery needs a 
management and implementation framework. Samoa asked that CCMs not see this as a 
threat, and explained that the importance of the resource is not just about money, it is a 
lifeline. 
161. Hon. Elisala Pita, Minister for Works and Natural Resources, Tuvalu drew the 
Commission’s attention to the critical importance of the decisions made at this meeting to 
small, fishery-dependent states. Tuvalu is small and extremely remote, with almost nothing 
but fishery resources, revenues from which finance schools, hospitals, and outer island 
communities. CMM 2013-01’s fourth month of FAD closure is implemented by Tuvalu but 
this closure has greatly reduced the profitability and attractiveness of fishing in the waters 
of Tuvalu, and has compromised Tuvalu’s revenues. At the same time, other coastal states 
did not impose the closure in their waters, distant water longliners did not deliver bigeye 
catch reductions, and bigeye high seas catches have increased. This CCM explained that it 
was hard for Tuvaluans to understand why they should subsidise other fishing fleets. The 
capacity provisions of CMM 2013-01 are also problematic as Tuvalu struggles to develop 
its own domestic purse seine fleet and utilise its fishery resources. Along with other 
members of FFA and PNA, Tuvalu will fulfil its fishery management responsibilities, but 
also intends to pursue its rights within the Commission. 
162. As a WCPFC Participating Territory, American Samoa explained that it has a substantial 
interest in the conservation and management of the region’s highly migratory fish stocks. 
Pago Pago is the home port of a domestic albacore longline fishery that fishes primarily in 
the American Samoa EEZ, the home port for US purse seine vessels fishing in the region 
and the home of two of the largest canneries in the Pacific, employing nearly half of the 
territory’s workforce. Like many other Pacific Islands countries, American Samoa’s 
economy is dependent on tuna fishing and processing. This CCM noted that Pacific island 
nations have long enjoyed an intimate relationship with the sea. As modern technology 
brought advances in fishing and commercial exploitation, the ocean has suffered. Like 
other Pacific Island states, American Samoa has development aspirations and noted the 
importance of recognizing the special requirements of SIDS and Territories within 
Commission decisions. American Samoa stated that the most important issues for them at 
this meeting include:  
24 
 
 
continuation of the Compliance Monitoring Scheme; 
 
adopting a comprehensive South Pacific albacore measure;  
 
eliminating loopholes for the non-provision of operational data; and 
 
establishing a fair and objective process to define and measure disproportionate 
conservation burden on SIDS and Participating Territories.  
American Samoa looks forward to working with other CCMs on these issues during this 
meeting. 
163. Indonesia noted its significant improvements in national policy for sustainable use of 
fisheries resources, including taking a number of regulatory actions in this regard such as a 
moratorium on the issuance of fishing permits for all vessels greater than 100 GT. At the 
Bali Tuna Conference, Indonesia made a commitment to permanently close for four 
months each year a suspected tuna spawning ground within its archipelagic waters to purse 
seine and gillnet fishing. The closure of the Banda Sea area will begin in mid-December 
2014. Indonesia believes that protecting this area from fishing activities will contribute to 
the health of tuna resources in the WCPO. Indonesia will seek clarification at this meeting 
on how it can materialize Article 30 of the Convention and para 49 of CMM 2013-01. 
Indonesia stated that, as a developing country, it seeks to develop its purse-seine fisheries 
in the high seas of the WCPO, and construct new purse seine vessels without a prior 
written recommendation from this Commission. 
164. Hon. Luwalhati Antonino, Chair of Mindanao Development Authority, Philippines gave a 
statement of support for the Commission. 
165. Hon. Billy Talagi, Minister of Natural Resources, Niue noted that his country’s interests in 
the Commission remain: stocks being managed sustainably, managing impacts of 
commercial fishing to avoid adversely affecting food security, realizing the economic 
development opportunities from highly migratory stocks and not diminishing or losing 
them, and the Southern Albacore longline fishery. This CCM stated that the wellbeing and 
interests of SIDS can’t be excluded or ignored in an effort to maintain or enhance 
commercial interests in the fishery, or considered collateral damage. Niue’s interests in the 
tuna fisheries, relative to most Commission members, are almost insignificant but they are 
significant to Niue’s economy and people and could be catered for quite easily in the 
Commission, and without delay. Niue thanked Professor Glenn Hurry for his contribution 
to the running of the Commission, and wished him well in his endeavours.  
166. Papua New Guinea would like to see effective and appropriate mechanisms developed to 
encourage members to comply with their obligations under the Commission. This CCM 
took the view that the Commission should focus on the effective management of the high 
seas, while recognising the sovereignty and sovereign rights of coastal states to develop 
their fisheries. SIDS should be given every opportunity to develop their fisheries through 
strategic investments in value addition by downstream processing their catch as it creates 
jobs and generates much needed revenue for their people. PNG is committed to the 
transformation of benefits derived from the harvest of tuna fisheries resources to coastal, 
inshore and inland fisheries developments to address food security and poverty alleviation 
in SIDS with limited capacity.  
167. Tokelau highlighted the critical part fisheries play in SIDS’ social and economic wellbeing. 
Fisheries are a main source of economic security and a vital part of Tokelau’s culture and 
heritage and the region’s health and food security. Tokelau valued its membership in the 
25 
 
Commission and other organizations and is prepared to do its fair share to conserve and 
manage the marine environment and looked forward to the Commission addressing its 
obligations to ensure conservation and management measures do not place a 
disproportionate burden on SIDS and Territories. Tokelau expressed concerns about the 
conservation of sharks, reminding the Commission that it declared its EEZ a shark 
sanctuary five years ago, and the southern albacore fishery. Tokelau highlighted the 
Tokelau Arrangement to improve the management of the albacore fishery and looked 
forward to a successful conclusion on this matter at this meeting. This CCM is also focused 
on a proposal with PNA to strengthen the tropical tuna measure and ensuring any new 
measure is fair and does not place a disproportionate burden on Tokelauans. 
168. Australia noted the overriding purpose of the Commission is ensuring the long-term 
conservation and sustainable management of the highly migratory fish stocks in the 
Western and Central Pacific Ocean and members share an interest in meeting this 
objective, now and into the future. For the Pacific Island members, within whose waters a 
significant proportion of the fisheries lie, the offshore fisheries sector delivers up to 70% of 
national income and represents one of a limited number of development opportunities. In 
Australia’s view the disproportionate burden on SIDS will only increase if fish stocks 
continue to be overfished. The evidence before the Commission increasingly suggests the 
need to take more purposeful and effective action. Australia’s priority is the adoption of a 
new CMM that provides a framework for the development of harvest strategies for key 
fisheries in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, a mechanism that will bring together 
existing work, set the direction for the Commission’s next endeavours, and provide the 
path to fair, effective harvest strategies for the region’s fisheries.  
169. Japan observed that it has two faces in the region as a distant water fishing nation whose 
fleet mainly operates in the tropical zone, and as a coastal state with artisanal fishing 
around its coastal area. As a distant water fishing nation, Japan has fully cooperated in 
introduction of meaningful and effective tropical tuna measures. On the other hand, as a 
coastal state Japan is suffering from disagreement between scientific advice and the reality 
in its coastal areas. For example, the science advice shows stock status of skipjack tuna in 
the Convention Area is healthy with a biomass twice as high as one that will support MSY, 
but Japan is suffering from poor skipjack migration to its coastal areas. Japan stated that its 
difficulty is the same as for many island members. Japan would like to cooperate to reach a 
compromise in the discussion of both the CMM on tropical tunas and TRP of skipjack. 
Finally Japan stressed its tremendous commitment to Pacific bluefin tuna resource 
management. 
170. The Cook Islands highlighted the great importance it places on its marine heritage and 
ocean treasures, and also recognises the sovereign burden that comes with stewardship over 
its large EEZ area. At this session, the Cook Islands will be paying special attention to the 
conservation and management of the southern albacore longline fishery and, noting its 
recent signing of the Tokelau Arrangement, intends to seek a proportionate response from 
the distant water nations which fish in the waters of the Cook Islands. This CCM 
highlighted the importance of stronger management measures of the adjoining Eastern 
High Seas Pocket.  
 
26 
 
AGENDA  ITEM  4  -  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS OF DEVELOPING 
STATES 
4.1 
CCM reports on the implementation of Article 30 
171. The Chair noted that this was a standing agenda item and that a paper summarizing CCM 
Annual Report Part 2 reporting under CMM 2013-07 paragraph 19 is accessible to CCMs 
on the secure side of the website (WCPFC11-2014-10).  
172. Chinese Taipei reported on its implementation of Article 30 and CMM 2013-07, to provide 
assistance to SIDS including for MCS, technology transfer, observer training, and support 
for the fisheries sector. This CCM has assigned scholarships, conducted technical training 
and provided technology and technical staff for many years and encourages investment in 
SIDS’ fisheries sectors. A total of USD2 million in a special fund over 5 years for 
fisheries-dependent SIDS now exists – the Chinese Taipei Trust Fund. This fund has been 
set up to finance SIDS’ implementation of conservation and management. Chinese Taipei 
is assisting SIDS with technological capability to advance their participation in MCS 
activities. Chinese Taipei and island CCMs have developed close relations over the years 
and is confident the Trust Fund will make a meaningful contribution to SIDS.  
173. The EU referred delegates to WCPFC11-2014-DP19, which summarizes its support to the 
region on fisheries-related issues. The main source of support is €18 million provided 
under the European Development Fund, with work delivered under two main projects, 
DEVFISH2 and SCICOFISH. DEVFISH2 funding of €8.2 million has been extended to 
March 2016, with an increase of over €500,000. It has supported several activities 
including addressing, among others, capacity building for competent authorities, for 
establishing the legal and organizational frameworks, sanitary/food safety issues related to 
certification of seafood for export, support to industry, E-Monitoring observer trials in 
longline fisheries, IUU catch certificate training, and support for combating IUU, including 
National Plans of Action in a number of Pacific Island nations. Scientific support is 
provided under SCICOFISH, which in 2014 provided €8.6 million and has been extended 
to September 2015 with a budget increase of €9.2 million. SCICOFISH has provided 
support for capacity building activities, including observer training courses in Pacific 
islands countries, Marine Stewardship Council certifications, trainers and debriefers, 
development of fisheries databases in a number of countries and web-based logsheet 
systems, and support to regional stock assessments including for silky sharks.  
174. Nauru acknowledged and welcomed the initiative by Chinese Taipei in introducing the 
Trust Fund, and looked forward to its full implementation and Pacific Island nations’ full 
utilization. 
175. Japan noted that since 2008 it has supported SIDS’ capacity building for fisheries statistics, 
stock assessments and monitoring through the Japan Trust Fund. This amounted to 
USD400,000 in 2014. Japan also supported SIDS through an FFA Promotion Fund, 
dispatching fisheries experts from Overseas Fisheries Cooperative Foundation and JICA 
and receiving trainees from developing states. Japan conducted a joint enforcement 
operation in one SIDS members’ EEZ in October and plans to expand such operations. 
Project activities, including construction of infrastructures, have been funded totaling 
approximately 450 million Yen over the last 5 years. Japan plans to continue cooperating 
with SIDS members into the future.  
27 
 
176. FFA members noted that the outcome document of the SIDS conference, the Samoa 
Pathway 2014, underlined that SIDS remain a special case for sustainable development, 
with their unique characteristics and vulnerabilities, and highlighted the need for genuine 
partnerships with developed nations to achieve development. The WCPF Convention 
recognises the Commission’s duty to give full recognition to the special requirements of 
SIDS in relation to conservation and management of fish stocks and the development of 
fisheries for such stocks, and recognises that they are the members most seriously affected 
by Commission decisions. FFA members noted that this is the backdrop for two significant 
CMMs adopted by the Commission last year, CMM 2013-06 on the criteria for 
consideration of conservation and management proposals and CMM 2013-07 on the special 
requirements of SIDS. Both seek to operationalise Article 30 of the Convention. Specific to 
CMM 2013-06, FFA members noted that consideration has been given to questions which 
seek to assess the impacts on SIDS and ensures SIDS’ needs are mainstreamed into the 
WCPFC’s decision-making process. CMM 2013-07 lays down a framework for 
transferring the provisions in Article 30 and Resolution 2008-01 into legally binding 
obligations and compels members of the Commission to take action. FFA members were 
keen to find a way the assistance can be targeted to specific SIDS' needs. These CCMs 
suggested a way forward: 
(i) SIDS continue to articulate their special requirements in a delegation paper (based on 
the approach used in WCPFC11-2014-DP20); 
(ii) such delegation papers can be put before the SC and TCC meetings and any updates 
included before it is then put before the Commission meeting;  
(iii) such delegation papers could be used as a checklist at each meeting to assess what 
specific needs have been met; and 
(iv) the list could be updated by FFA Members, as required, when such needs have been 
met or as more specific needs are set out arising from new Commission obligations.  
 
177. The delegation paper would be treated as a living document. FFA members welcomed 
input from non-FFA participating territories in the further development of this paper, and 
referred the Commission to WCPFC11-2014-DP20. 
178. FFA members thanked CCMs who reported on their assistance to SIDS. Under para 19 of 
CMM 2013-07, CCMs are required to provide information in their Annual Report Part 2 on 
implementation of this measure. Referring to WCPFC-TCC10-2014-10, FFA members 
noted that out of the 11 received from developed CCMs, only 5 (which included two FFA 
members) provided detailed responses. This reporting is required of all developed CCMs to 
enable an assessment of whether assistance is being provided as required by the measure 
and Article 30. FFA members suggested the Secretariat be tasked to put together a 
reporting template for CMM 2013-07 para 19 in the Annual Report Part 2 which is based 
on the categories in CMM 2013-07, to facilitate analysis of the types of assistance provided 
and highlight gaps. FFA members also drew participants’ attention to WCPFC11-2014-
DP23, which proposes a new approach to how SIDS will be assessed in the CMS. 
179. Korea noted that it will continue to cooperate with SIDS to develop capacity building to 
support fisheries conservation and management. This CCM hoped to finance the WCPFC’s 
tag and release program by providing 100 million Korean Won, equivalent to around 
USD100,000, every year over the next 5 years. It would be delivered in December 2014. 
The Korean government will make efforts to provide more financial assistance to the 
WCPFC. 
28 
 
180. Australia advised that in 2013-14, it contributed approximately AUD12 million in 
development assistance to help Pacific Island countries manage their fisheries, and reported 
that Australia had provided an update on its implementation of CMM 2013-07 in its 
Annual Report Part 2. The Australian aid program is expanding its assistance to the Pacific 
fisheries sector, in recognition of the development aspirations of Pacific Island countries 
and the importance of fisheries to economic growth and food security in the region. In 
2013-14, Australian aid included capacity development of SIDS nationals, enhancing the 
participation of SIDS in monitoring, control and surveillance activities and providing 
support for the domestic fisheries sector of certain SIDS. This funding and aid is largely 
delivered through regional organizations which provide services to members based on 
member-identified priorities: SPC Aquaculture and Marine Ecosystems Division – 
approximately AUD4 million per annum, and FFA – AUD5.1 million per annum. In 
addition, the Australian Fisheries Management Authority provided capacity and technical 
assistance for port State measures and legal and administrative arrangements to PNG and 
Kiribati, and Australian Fisheries Management Authority officers regularly take part in 
regional operations, providing assistance to SIDS’ patrol boat boarding parties and joint 
operation coordination centres. 
181. New Zealand noted that Article 30 is a critical feature of the Convention text, facilitating 
active participation by developing states to meet fisheries management objectives. This 
CCM stated that any measures agreed should not cause disproportionate burden. New 
Zealand has committed to provide NZD82 million to support Pacific island fisheries 
management development and compliance during 2012 to 2017/18. This includes support 
to specific countries for in-country institutional strengthening, regional and national 
information services, vocational training, regional observer program, SPC data 
management and stock assessments for Pacific island countries, FFA fisheries management 
development and compliance advice and services.  
182. The Chair asked for views on adopting the recommended process that FFA outlined in 
WCPFC11-2014-DP20_rev1. 
183. The Cook Islands urged members to consider the FFA paper, and noted its checklist is an 
example of a living document. 
184. Several CCMs commented that more time was needed. One CCM noted that it was not 
clear if an obligation is placed on a CCM by the checklist.  
185. The EU asked for clarification about the legal status of the paper, querying whether it was 
something like an aide memoire or more like a performance review. This CCM queried 
whether there were legal consequences as it was not a CMM.  
186. Japan reminded the Commission that Asian nations need more time to digest the paper 
because of its language problem. 
187. FFA members thanked all who spoke, and explained that the paper was premised on the 
question which is put to SIDS: “what do you require assistance on?” The table in the paper 
addresses this. FFA members asked that time that is given in this meeting to progress an 
outcome on this, noting that it was an FFA proposal which supported CMM 2013-07 and 
did not pre-empt the CMR process.  
29 
 
188. Canada queried how it related to the CMR process and what linkages there were with 
another proposal which would be discussed later in the meeting. 
189. The Chair suspended the discussion on this issue to give delegations time to digest the 
information in hardcopy. 
190. After some consultations during the meeting, FFA members tabled a revised working paper 
(WCPFC11-2014-DP20_rev2). 
191. The EU asked for clarification on the paper’s status, as it was not a CMM but a supporting 
paper, and commented that the paper would be more useful if it was country-specific, 
identifying specific needs, as not all SIDS need the same kind of assistance. The EU noted 
that it has specific internal procedures and rules for regional development aid  and 
suggested language such as ‘tool to better target assistance’ or ‘guide’ were preferable. 
While the checklist can be transmitted to counterparts in other services of the European 
Commission, they would use it as a guide, and not as a compulsory document. The EU 
explained that development aid is organised regionally, and is discussed extensively with 
interested countries and with regional bodies.  
192. Japan supported the EU and remarked that it was not comfortable with the name of “check 
list”. Japan commented that the paper should be a list developed by SIDS. Japan also 
commented that the paper should be used as something for reference in the internal 
procedures for regional assistance. 
193. FFA members explained that even though it is not in the form of a CMM, the paper is 
meant to implement a Commission obligation. These CCMs appreciated the assistance 
rendered to SIDS but noted the paper intends to provide targeted assistance, specifically for 
the obligations to SIDS under the Convention. 
194. The Vice Chair noted para 2(iv) of WCPFC11-2014-DP20_rev2 provides that it be treated 
as a living document. The Vice Chair noted that there was general agreement for the 
checklist existing, but that CCMs had expressed a preference not to be limited to the 
checklist; this would respect their own internal processes for using other things in addition 
to the checklist. The Vice Chair suggested that when CCMs go through their internal 
processes, this can be at the forefront of their considerations. 
195. One CCM noted that this could be a useful tool, and did not see it as intended to limit 
assistance or raise an expectation from any one developing CCM that all these types of 
assistance will be required. The checklist helps identify needs so developed CCMs can 
target assistance toward that list. 
196. FFA members stated their great appreciation for the reports of assistance provided by some 
developed CCMs. In addition, FFA members proposed an approach that would allow such 
reports to be more targeted to specific SIDS needs in tuna fisheries, through the following: 
a. SIDS continue to articulate their special requirements and set this out in a 
Delegation Paper (similar to WCPFC11-2014-DP20_rev2); 
b. such DP/checklist can be placed before the SC and TCC meetings and any 
updates included before it is placed before the Commission meeting; 
30 
 
c. the FFA-SIDS DP could be used as a checklist at each meeting to assess what 
specific needs have been met;  
d. the list could be updated by FFA Members, as required, where such needs are 
met or as more specific needs are set out arising from the annual ever-increasing 
Commission obligations. Hence, the DP is to be treated as a living document. 
197. WCPFC11 noted the checklist in WCPFC11-2014-DP20_rev2 provided by FFA 
members, setting out an evaluation of SIDS special requirements and the respective 
status of assistance, and agreed to take into consideration the checklist as a guide to 
assist developed CCMs to assess the status of assistance to SIDS. (Attachment D) 
198. WCPFC11 tasked the WCPFC Secretariat to put together a reporting template for 
paragraph 19 of CMM 2013-07, which incorporates the various categories in that 
measure. It was noted that this will facilitate the analysis of the types of assistance 
provided by developed CCMs to implement CMM 2013-07 as a whole, and highlight 
any gaps in such assistance. 
199. On the latter decision, the Interim-Executive Director remarked that the Secretariat was 
happy to have this tasking and would gladly receive input before the Annual Report Part 2 
online system needs to be finalised for 2014 reporting. 
4.2 
Review of Implementation of CMM 2013-07 
200. There was no further discussion on CMM 2013-07. 
4.3 
Report from the Chair on Implementation of CMM 2013-06 and Disproportionate 
Burden Workshop 
201. The Chair reported on discussions during the 27 November 2014 Disproportionate Burden 
Workshop held just prior to WCPFC11, and advised that a final summary report from the 
workshop would subsequently be posted once comments were received (WCPFC11-2014-
11). That report highlights a series of items that the workshop agreed, explaining that it 
took some time to agree those points and they would not be reopened. The group indicated 
that proponents should give the issue serious consideration, consulting with SIDS prior to 
full development of proposals so they will understand from the SIDS’ point of view what 
burdens are likely to be placed on them. The workshop came to the view that the ultimate 
decision on whether a disproportionate burden stems from a decision taken by the 
Commission is on the Commission, not on an individual CCM, and the Commission should 
maintain some flexibility in how it deals with or mitigates an identified disproportionate 
burden. It was strongly encouraged that the proposals are provided at least one month 
ahead of the Commission meeting or earlier. It was agreed that for the immediate future the 
primary way the Commission would be deal with disproportionate burden in CMMs would 
be through CMM 2013-06. 
202. PNA and Tokelau made a statement about the special requirements of developing states, 
especially SIDS. Most of the catch is taken in and around the waters of SIDS and many 
SIDS are dependent on these resources for their sustainable development. These special 
requirements include the obligation on the Commission to avoid transferring a 
disproportionate burden from its measures. PNA and Tokelau stated that they supported the 
workshop as an opportunity to make progress and to improve the Commission’s 
31 
 
effectiveness in conserving and managing stocks, especially tropical tuna, where these 
factors are centrally important. These CCMs were encouraged by the paper presented by 
FFA on the concept of disproportionate burden and appreciated some of the analysis and 
ideas from the Honolulu workshop. However the Disproportionate Burden Workshop was 
an opportunity lost and did not address what these CCMs consider has been a systematic 
effort to sideline disproportionate burden and say it should not be taken into account until it 
is identified and measured through a complex bureaucratic process. Similarly, the 
importance of CMM 2013-06 as an instrument for addressing the impacts on SIDS and 
avoiding or removing disproportionate burden was undermined. As a result, the 
Commission now heads into an important discussion on arrangements to remove the 
disproportionate burden of conservation action transferred onto SIDS by CMM 2013-01 
without any apparent progress on the form or content of those arrangements. The eight 
points in the report provide the basis for going forward. CCMs need to keep talking to each 
other on the basis of those points, especially through the application of CMMs 2013-06 and 
2013-07, so it forms part of the mainstream of discussions on measures rather than a 
subject dealt with separately through workshops or working group processes.  
203. Palau noted that it could not participate in the Disproportionate Burden Workshop but on 
reading the draft report it appears that disproportionate burden does not exist until it is 
proven that it exists. Palau reported it is already feeling the impacts of climate change, and 
the rhetoric on that very important issue sounds very similar. Palau does not want to see a 
situation where fish stocks are running out and small countries have to retreat from the 
central Pacific. 
204. One CCM was pleased that the workshop report recognised those CCMs which used the 
checklist for their proposed measures, and commented that if a proponent wishes for a 
measure to be passed, SIDS should be consulted so mechanisms can be discussed.  
205. WCPFC11 accepted the report of the Implementation of CMM 2013-06 and 
Disproportionate Burden Workshop. (WCPFC11-2014-11_rev1) 
 
AGENDA  ITEM  5  -  REPORT OF THE MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES 
WORKSHOP  
5.1 
Report on Progress from MOW3 
206. Ian Cartwright briefly presented WCPFC11-2014-12_Rev1, the summary report of the 
Third Management Objectives Workshop (MOW3), which was held on 28 November 2014, 
in Apia, Samoa prior to WCPFC11. The first MOW, in Manila in 2012, considered 
management objectives, indicators and reference points, and was primarily a capacity 
building exercise. The expert panel drafted for the second MOW (MOW2) a ‘strawman’ 
document which included a candidate list of management objectives, performance 
indicators, and target reference points for each major fishery. WCPFC10 had agreed to 
hold an additional workshop (MOW3) in 2014 with further input from the expert panel and 
supporting analyses by the Scientific Services Provider and tasked the Executive Director 
with exploring external sources of funding for another workshop in 2015.  
207. Mr Cartwright made some observations on the MOW process:  
32 
 
 
it is a useful opportunity to discuss technical issues in an informal setting, allowing for an 
open exchange on key matters of interest; 
 
work is directed by the Commission, though most of the work is done by FFA and SPC, 
on which MOW can piggyback; 
 
it is relatively cost-effective as it operates alongside Commission meetings but is still 
expensive; 
 
it is an informal process which has grown from its original purpose and should perhaps be 
renamed a “Management Strategies Workshop’; 
 
it is now too large for detailed technical discussions on important fisheries management 
issues, and there may be a need for small intersessional group work; and 
 
there is no clear place in Commission structure in which to feed through 
advice/recommendations of this nature. 
 
208. The objective for MOW3 was to discuss and report to WCPFC11 on management issues 
including: the establishment and development of a management framework based on a 
harvest strategy approach, determining risk levels, a TRP for skipjack and associated 
multispecies impacts and a process for developing a TRP for South Pacific albacore. 
209. If the harvest strategy CMM is adopted, a one or two day workshop before a meeting is 
probably insufficient to progress some of the issues involved, with some delegations 
considering that a small technical advisory group might be a good approach. It would need 
to be funded at an appropriate level. 
210. Mr Cartwright suggested three areas of future work:  
 
Technical scientific support through the Scientific Services Provider 
 
 
External experts to support the scientific process 
 
WCPFC level stakeholder meetings to consider and direct the work. 
 
 
211. One CCM commented that it had wanted SPC to undertake the work on reference points 
and harvest control rules, and remarked on the conclusion on page 8 of the report 
supporting the establishment of a technical working group. This CCM did not agree with it 
being recorded as an agreed outcome and PNA members did not support the proliferation 
of such bodies, believing the work should be integrated into the work of SC and TCC. 
212. Several CCMs supported the ongoing work of the MOW.  
213. FFA members noted that although it has taken almost a decade for the Commission to get 
to the point of discussing management principles, general agreement is emerging on 
establishing a structured process to achieve shared management objectives for key stocks. 
Although the workshop was created to exchange views not make recommendations on 
particular proposals, FFA members were encouraged to hear the views expressed about the 
basic concept of the FFA Harvest Strategy CMM proposal. Comparing the current state of 
stocks to when the Commission was first established, developing measures to try and fix 
problems after they emerge is a system which is not working well. FFA members 
supported establishing a basic framework to help the Commission develop management 
rules in a structured, forward-thinking way, while allowing for existing reference point 
decisions and agreed objectives to be carried forward. 
214. Japan was generally supportive of the idea of the precautionary approach, noting that 
Article 6.1 (a) of the Convention tasked the Commission to determine stock-specific 
33 
 
reference points and Article 6.3 to develop harvest control rules. Japan expressed its view 
that WCPFC should concentrate efforts to develop  harvest strategies that are stock-specific 
in order to ensure the long-term conservation and sustainable use of stocks in the 
Convention Area, pointing that development of a harvest strategy approach for fisheries in 
short period is practically impossible due to mixture of many fisheries in the area. It is with 
this understanding that Japan and Indonesia had jointly submitted comments on the FFA 
harvest strategy CMM. Regarding a TRP for skipjack, although the majority of CCMs 
think 50% of the estimated recent average spawning biomass in the absence of fishing 
would be appropriate, for Japan and some island members,it is not enough for recovery of 
this stock to the level before local depletion was observed. Japan also stated that the MSY 
approach is not perfect for the stocks like skipjack which are caught mostly in the tropical 
area but which exist almost across the entire WCPO. Finally, Japan supported 60% of the 
estimated recent average spawning biomass in the absence of fishing as a TRP for skipjack. 
215. The Chair reminded delegates that the current discussion was focused on the MOW process 
and its utility to the Commission, rather than a specific reference point. 
216. The EU supported the MOW process and expressed the view that the Commission was at 
the start of a much longer process which would guide the work of the Commission in years 
to come. The MOW provides a stable and objective framework by which the Commission 
can adopt CMMs. The EU could provide funding for this essential work.  
217. Canada noted that this third session was much more focused on proposals, which moves 
the Commission in the right direction to a clearer focus on management objectives around 
tropical tuna stocks as well as South Pacific albacore. This CCM noted that within the NC 
there has been some tangible progress for some northern stocks, which should be continued, 
and suggested there be some congruity between the two processes. This CCM had been 
uncertain about the progress being made through the MOW process but was now more 
supportive given the more concrete results coming out of it. A lot will hinge on budgetary 
implications. It was noted that there could be contributions from the NGO community and 
others. 
218. One CCM took the view that it should be a bit more formal, and remarked favourably on 
the suggestion of a management strategy approach. This CCM saw the MOW process as an 
investment and it was timely to be looking at a fisheries management role. 
219. Referencing one CCM’s comment on the meeting’s record, Mr Cartwright noted that the 
record was still draft and nothing was locked in. The Report of MOW3 was finalised, and 
the latest draft was WCPFC11-2014-12 Rev2 (dated 3 December 2014).  
220. WCPFC11 accepted the Report of MOW3 (WCPFC11-2014-12 Rev2). 
5.2 
Future work plan and funding 
221. The Chair noted that a number of comments around the table supported the MOW process 
as a concept, and there was also a view that the kinds of activities happening in the MOW 
could be integrated into the SC and TCC. 
222. In response to a query, the Interim-Executive Director advised that a MOW Workplan and 
budget was in preparation. It would take into account the comments which had been 
expressed and would be circulated and discussed at the FAC. The Interim-Executive 
34 
 
Director commented that it was always a pleasure having Mr Cartwright facilitate the 
MOW and his expertise was greatly appreciated by the Commission. 
223. The Chair commented that with an increased focus on compliance issues in TCC, issues 
were coming to the Commission un-vetted. The Chair suggested that many of the proposals 
were considered by the Commission to be very complicated and technical, and it might 
serve WCPFC well if there were a body that could review those issues and report to the 
Commission. 
224. One CCM agreed that there was a need to vet proposals, or conduct technical work, so by 
the time an issue is brought to the Commission, key technical discussions are able to have 
taken place. This CCM was loathe to create additional bodies as the Commission has 
limited resources, but agreed that it was a discussion the Commission must have.  
225. One CCM commented that some or all of these issues can be put through SC or TCC. 
226. The Chair confirmed that the FAC would review a draft work plan to progress WCPFC’s 
consideration of a management framework as proposed by MOW3 (WCPFC11-2014-12b).  
227. WCPFC11, taking into account offers of supplementary funding through CCM 
voluntary contributions and those from external sources, was able to allocate 
sufficient funding in the approved 2015 budget, which should together allow for the 
proposed 2015 activities in the MOW3 workplan to progress the consideration of a 
management framework in 2015 (see WCPFC11-2014-12b) to be fully funded during 
2015.   
 
AGENDA  ITEM  6  -  CMM 2013-01 TROPICAL TUNA MEASURE 
6.1 
Chair’s presentation on Tropical Tuna Measure CMM 2013-01 
228. Referring the Commission to WCPFC11-2014-13, the Chair noted a number of issues in 
CMM 2013-01 that required the Commission’s attention at this meeting, including an issue 
in the measure relating to the duration of FAD closures, and capacity management. 
Recalling the proposal from PNA members + Tokelau to amend certain provisions of 
CMM 2013-01, and Japan’s comments on that proposal, the Chair advised that discussions 
at Heads of Delegation suggested that considering the issues together and working them 
through in a small working group would be appropriate. The Chair advised that the group 
would need a Chair. The Chair sought views on how to progress the work on CMM 2013-
01 during WCPFC11.  
229. Referring to their paper, WCPFC11-2014-DP08, FFA members shared the view of others 
that CMM 2013-01 needs to be strengthened at WCPFC11 and reminded delegates that 
bigeye status has declined to a point where it is both overfished and subject to overfishing, 
and that the science shows that the CMM has the potential to come close to recovering the 
stock if fully implemented. FFA members’ priorities for WCPFC11’s deliberations on the 
tropical tuna CMM are as follows: 
 
Improvements to purse seine measures, including the FAD closure, effort limits, 
particularly in the high seas, management to reduce effort creep and address 
disproportionate burden. 
35 
 
 
A greater contribution to bigeye conservation and management by the longline 
sector, including compliance improvements, stronger effort management and an 
explicit limit for longline yellowfin catches. 
 
Provision of operational data. 
230. FFA members stated that the Commission has to find ways of improving the effectiveness 
of the primary management tools in CMM 2013-01, but not in ways that perpetuate the 
disproportionate burden on SIDS for conservation and management of tropical tunas. FFA 
estimates that the FAD closures have cost the purse seine fishery up to $390 million since 
2009, significantly eroding the profitability of this fishery from which many SIDS secure 
critical revenue. These CCMs strongly expressed the view that the Commission must not 
allow amendments to the tropical tuna CMM that further increase the cost borne by SIDS, 
and the draft PNA members + Tokelau CMM provides a comprehensive starting point. 
231. Several CCMs supported the establishment of a small working group to work on these 
issues in detail.  
232. Japan expressed strong concern about the decreasing trend of bigeye and skipjack stocks 
explained in the SC10 report. Japan reminded WCPFC11 that the number of FAD sets in 
2013 still exceeded the level of 2010, although SC10 reaffirmed SC8 recommendation to 
reduce the number of FAD sets to below 2010 levels. Japan stated that the measure for 
tropical tunas is less effective than anticipated and the Commission needs to establish 
additional measures that consider the recommendation by SC10 seriously. Regarding the 
provision of operational data, Japan stated that it will provide the data under the 
cooperative analysis for Pacific-wide bigeye stock assessment although it has domestic 
legal constraints. Japan further noted the concerns of Japanese fishermen about the reduced 
migration of skipjack to its coastal area. 
233. Some CCMs expressed the view that the tropical tuna measure is too young to properly 
assess its impact.  
234. The USA expressed the view that the Commission should focus on addressing the 
outstanding elements of CMM 2013-01, not reopen or revise the measure more generally, 
and noted the sorts of projections that the Commission must rely on to design its 
conservation and management measures: 
a.   The Scientific Services Provider’s evaluation of the expected effectiveness of the 
measure tells us that CMM 2013-01 has promise to get close to the Commission’s 
objectives, if not meet them.  
b.   The evaluation of CMM 2013-01 that was conducted by the Scientific Services 
Provider (WCPFC11-2014-15) concludes that if future recruitment remains on 
average consistent with recent (2002-2011) levels, the CMM will reduce the risk of 
the spawning biomass falling below the limit reference point (LRP) to 4% relative to 
the status quo (2012) risk of 32%, and will reduce the median level of fishing 
mortality to approximately the MSY level. This CCM noted that as the fisheries are 
monitored in the coming years, these projections will change, and the Commission 
can respond accordingly.  
There is a measure in place, and there has not been enough time to see its impact, and 
while references have been made to failures to comply with CMM 2013-01, the lack of 
compliance doesn’t seem to have been raised in the CMR process. The best course is to 
allow the existing measure to continue on, and focus on three issues that require resolution 
36 
 
this year: whether or not there is a disproportionate burden on SIDS created by this 
measure, b) the issue of capacity provided in para 54(c) and c) limits on yellowfin tuna 
catch. 
235. The EU noted that there was no indication in the science that the measure is not achieving 
the desired results, as it is too early to assess results due to the lack of recent data. The EU 
expressed the view that rather than reopening the measure the Commission should focus on 
compliance and monitoring, removing existing loopholes in the measure, eliminate 
exceptions and look at any possible disproportionate burden, but the latter should be seen 
within a wider framework.  
236. One CCM noted that the small working group should not be convened simultaneously with 
plenary. On the issue of operational data, this CCM noted that some members, including 
this one, have domestic constraints which limit its provision. But under a cooperative 
arrangement with SPC, which was agreed 2 months ago, some data can be provided. This 
CCM sought clarification about the additional month FAD closure and questioned whether 
additional longline closure was needed. 
237. One CCM recalled that it took years of negotiations to adopt CMM 2013-01 and noted that 
the current approach to reduce fishing mortality in the existing measure is practical, hence 
it preferred to limit any significant change to the measure. This CCM noted that it currently 
cannot supply operational data due to domestic legal constraints, but it had sent its 
scientists carrying all the operational data to the office of SPC in February this year, these 
efforts have been acknowledged by SPC in many documents. Besides, an agreement to 
make available all the operational data for the pan-Pacific bigeye tuna stock assessment of 
2015 has been reached between some CCMs and SPC, this CCM will continue to make 
operational level data available to SPC in accordance with the agreement for stock 
assessment. This CCM also stressed the issue of provision of operational level data shall be 
separated from discussion of this measure.  
238. Referring to their proposal, WCPFC11-2014-DP11, three priority starting points for PNA 
members in reviewing CMM 2013-01 are: a) para 15, which commits the Commission to 
ensuring the CMM does not result in transferring a disproportionate burden of conservation 
action onto SIDS. These CCMs expressed the view that the existing CMM transfers a 
substantial disproportionate burden onto SIDS and arrangements were required to remove 
this burden, as agreed last year; b) para 56, in which it was agreed that the tropical tuna 
CMM would be reviewed this year. From information provided to SC and the TCC, key 
elements of the CMM are not having the intended effect of reducing fishing mortality on 
bigeye; previous longline bigeye catch limits have failed to reduce catches; purse seine 
bigeye catches are rising while the number of FAD sets is falling; and c) operational data – 
tropical tuna fisheries cannot be effectively managed while the major longline fleets 
conceal the high seas operations of their vessels, refuse to carry independent observers or 
enter ports where offloads can be monitored. PNA and Tokelau noted they have submitted 
proposed revisions to the CMM addressing these factors, to improve the prospects for the 
CMM. 
239. The Chair noted the differing views. 
37 
 
6.1.1 
Updated scientific advice (SPC-OFP) 
240. Dr John Hampton (SPC-OFP) presented an update of key fishery data relevant to CMM 
2013-01 as well as WCPFC11-2014-15, a quantitative evaluation of the potential impact of 
the CMM on the stock status of bigeye tuna. Regarding recent fishery trends: 
 
Purse seine effort has increased steadily and the level estimated for 2013 was a record 
high. 2014 effort, as indicated by VMS to 31 October, is tracking at the 2013 level. 
 
The number of purse seine associated sets in recent years has remained at a high level 
near to the 2004 level. Catches of bigeye tuna have increased substantially, in part 
because of higher effort in the eastern part of the western and central Pacific where 
bigeye catch per unit effort (CPUE) is higher. Effort in the eastern area is higher in 2014 
compared to recent years, and therefore high bigeye catches should be expected for 2014. 
 
Purse seine FAD closures since 2009 have decreased the number of associated sets 
during the closure months to low levels, although not to zero because of legitimate sets 
on FADs in archipelagic waters and in the WCPFC/IATTC overlap area. As a result, the 
principal effect has been to dramatically reduce purse seine catches of bigeye tuna during 
the closure months. Some decreases in skipjack and yellowfin catches have also been 
observed during the FAD closures. By contrast, very high catches of all species are often 
observed in the months immediately following the FAD closures. 
 
Longline catches of bigeye tuna peaked in 2004 and dropped in 2005. Since that time 
longline catches have remained at roughly the same level (noting that the preliminary 
estimate for 2013 is likely to be an under-estimate at this stage). In the core area of the 
tropical longline fishery, bigeye CPUE has declined since 2014 and fishing effort has 
increased. 
241. CMM 2013-01 was evaluated using a suite of models chosen by SC10 running in 
projection mode. Future recruitment was sampled either from the long-term time series or 
from the most recent 10 year period of the assessment. More emphasis was given to the 
latter recruitment scenario, as per the recommendation of SC6. The results of the 
evaluation can be summarised as follows, noting that the below comments refer to the 
recent recruitment scenario: 
 
Both the purse seine and longline fisheries are subject to measures, but with various 
exemptions or exclusions. The general approach was to assume that all measures 
scheduled to be in place by 2017 would be continued into the future, and that those parts 
of the fisheries that are not subject to measures would continue to operate at 2012 levels. 
Under these assumptions, purse seine effort with associated sets is estimated to reduce to 
78% of the 2012 level, with effort using unassociated sets increasing by the same amount. 
Longline catch is estimated to decrease to 87% of the 2012 level under the assumptions 
noted above. All other fisheries were assumed to continue at 2012 levels. 
 
The multi-model projections indicated that continuation of the status quo (2012) would 
result in a 32% risk of the bigeye spawning biomass remaining below the limit reference 
point of 20% of the recent average unfished level. Also, fishing mortality is estimated to 
remain above the MSY level with high probability. 
 
The application of the CMM, as assumed, is estimated to reduce the risk of the spawning 
biomass remaining below the limit reference point of 20% of the recent average unfished 
level to 4%, and increase the median value of spawning biomass depletion from 24% to 
38 
 
30% of the recent average unfished level. Also, the median fishing mortality is estimated 
to reduce to approximately the MSY level. 
242. Some CCMs noted exemptions and exceptions undermined the CMM’s effectiveness. 
243. The EU noted that a lot of fishing is taking place during FAD closures, and archipelagic 
waters are excluded from the measure, and that it is possible for a CCM that has adopted a 
national FAD management plan not apply the tropical tuna measure. The EU stated that the 
measure is applied in a patchy way that is difficult to monitor. 
244. PNA members noted WCPFC Yearbook data showing a 40% increase in the catch of 
bigeye by purse seine vessels fishing on the high seas in 2013 compared to 2012. Because 
high seas effort was allowed to increase from 2014 under CMM 2013-01, FAD closures in 
the high seas is an issue that needs to be taken up by the Commission.  
245. Noting that FAD sets are increasing even though there is a FAD closure, Japan stated that 
FADs should be controlled to a set number. Japan requested SPC provide longline data 
broken-down into a country by country basis, recalling data showing a longline effort 
increase. Japan noted that a breakdown figure on a country by country basis, by effort, by 
year for 10 years would be beneficial for the Commission to understand which CCM 
increased its longline effort. SPC agreed that it can do that and further clarified that it could 
do that during the meeting. 
246. One CCM sought clarification about the longline catch, observing that it has been stable 
since 2007 but still well below the 2001 baseline average. Dr Hampton confirmed that it 
had declined dramatically since about 2005. 
247. PNA members noted that the presentation shows that the CMM can be effective at 
removing overfishing of bigeye, but depends on the effectiveness of the FAD closure and 
the longline catch limits. These CCMs expressed the view that implementation of core 
measures have been a failure. Catches are at the same level as before agreed cuts and were 
the same as in CMM 2008-01. There was no reason to believe CMM 2013-01 would be 
any more effective, especially in light of a lack of operational data. Additionally, this CCM 
noted problems with the effectiveness of the FAD closure, and referred delegates to 
WCPFC11-2014-DP12.  
248. PNA members expressed surprise that the longline reduction appears to amount to 12% at 
best; these CCMs recalled that it was agreed to reduce by 30% by 2017. PNA members 
noted an assumption in the data relating to one longline fleet, and observed that this is not 
the only fleet that seems to put more effort into getting around the bigeye catch limits than 
applying them, but this fleet, unlike some others, provides reliable data on their catches. 
249. The Chair thanked Dr Hampton for the presentation and suspended discussion on CMM 
2013-01. 
6.3 
Strategy for progress through WCPFC11 
250. Upon resumption of the discussion, the Chair queried the best way forward given the time 
pressures on the Commission’s discussions on the tropical tuna measure. 
251. One CCM viewed CCMs talking and identifying common ground as useful. 
39 
 
252. Some CCMs noted that the SWG should not meet concurrently with the heads of 
delegation meeting which would select the new Executive Director, as they were small 
delegations.  
253. The Chair proposed scheduling time to discuss the tropical tuna measure and reminded 
CCMs that if the Commission couldn’t achieve everything then it should try and achieve as 
much as it could, and look for commonalities. The Chair noted that the Commission was 
faced with several outstanding matters in CMM 2013-01, including the capacity issue and 
establishing catch levels for yellowfin tuna, and needed to attend to those things. He 
reminded delegates that catch limits on yellowfin were agreed last year so there was no 
reason that issue could not be progressed at WCPFC11. The Chair further noted that 
WCPFC had been deferring significant activity on capacity; capacity issues were not 
something either SIDS or distant water fishing nations could resolve by themselves and 
durable partnerships were needed to address the tropical tuna issue.  
254. After a number of meetings of the tropical tuna SWG, on 4 December Japan sought the 
Chair’s guidance on how to approach the measure, noting its importance and the short time 
available to resolve outstanding issues. Japan expressed the view that it was the 
responsibility of the Chair to instruct the group. 
255. The Chair confirmed that the Chair can guide the group but not instruct it, and noted that 
no delegates had indicated that common understanding had been reached. The Chair 
advised that the SWG was to look at the disproportionate burden, capacity and yellowfin 
aspects of CMM 2013-01 at a minimum. 
6.1.2 
Outstanding issues and requirements for 2014 
Additional FAD Management Options 
256. The Interim-Executive Director noted that in response to the tasking in paragraph 38 of 
CMM 2013-01, the former Executive Director had sent out Circular 2014/60, which was 
also tabled at SC10 and TCC10. The Secretariat had developed draft terms of reference for 
a FAD Management Options Working Group (Attachment 1 of WCPFC11-2014-13) and 
directed delegates to WCPFC11-2014-13, which lists outstanding issues and requirements 
under CMM 2013-01. The Interim-Executive Director directed delegates to refer to page 3 
of WCPFC11-2014-13, noting that both SC10 and TCC10 had supported the establishment 
of the working group, and both committees had discussed possible elements which would 
be included in the objectives of a working group. The SC and TCC recommendations were 
considered by the Secretariat in developing the draft terms of reference (provided in 
WCPFC11-2014-13 Attachment 1). There remains some discussion to be had at WCPFC11 
about how such a working group would conduct its business, and also the need for a Chair.  
257. The Chair suspended discussions and asked the Commission to consider the draft 
document, which he proposed returning to later in the week during discussions on CMM 
2013-01. 
258. In advance of the finalisation of the budget on 5 December, the EU expressed a preference 
to come to agreement for a working group on FAD Management Options and to adopt the 
terms of reference (WCPFC11-2014-13_Att 1). The EU recalled strong interest to advance 
this work and reminded delegates of SPC papers and discussion at SC10 on the issue which 
40 
 
highlighted the need for more info on FADs and their monitoring and tracking. The EU 
thought the working group’s work could be mostly conducted electronically. 
259. The Interim-Executive Director reminded the Commission that the Secretariat was asked to 
prepare a draft TOR in response to the interest by TCC and SC in having a working group 
established. The Secretariat had not received any formal comments on the TOR during 
WCPFC11.  
260. PNA members informed the Commission they had been working with Pew, trialling 
electronic FAD tracking and monitoring. The initial trial showed it is feasible, and PNA 
members are working towards a trial period across all foreign fleets in 2016. These CCMs 
supported the proposed working group as a good forum for coordination and to continue to 
improve FAD management. They agreed with the scope of the TOR set out in the paper’s 
Attachment 1 but asked that “FAD pricing” be added to the list of options in para (d) of the 
TOR. 
261. PNA members asked for clarification about whether the FAD Management Options 
working group will be subsidiary body of the Commission, meaning the group would be 
open to all CCMs, that all observers to the Commission would have observer status, and 
that the working group may consult with any other organisation, including industry 
organisations. 
Otherwise 
industry 
would 
participate as 
members 
of 
national 
delegations. These CCMs noted that if a meeting took place, funding would need to be 
budgeted for SIDS. 
262.  The Commission discussed whether there was a difference between a subsidiary body and 
a working group, and examples of the CDS, E-reporting and observers working groups 
were mentioned. It was noted that “in principle” agreement to establish a working group as 
a priority would assist with FAC budget discussions. 
263. The Interim-Executive Director commented that past practice indicates that for a meeting 
of a working group there has to be a certain amount of money allocated in the approved 
budget that provides for the travel, DSA and other costs for developing members and 
participating territories to attend. There were indications from SC or TCC of the types of 
material the group would consider but there has been no discussion or advice from these 
bodies about how the working group should work, and it would be important for the 
Commission to clarify this so that the FAC can consider an appropriate budgetary 
allocation. The Interim-Executive Director added that electronic working groups haven’t 
worked particularly well, based on past experience.  
264. Tuvalu noted that FAD management is important to PNA members, and they want an 
opportunity to participate actively in the working group. 
265. The EU suggested that the group could start work as a virtual group and meet back to back 
with the SC and TCC, or independently of those meetings. This CCM noted that for the 
CDS working group the Commission only allocated USD20,000 but the EmandEr working 
group, because it was a standalone group, was allocated USD100,000 or USD120,000. The 
EU commented that there was a lot of coordinating work to be done and suggested that the 
working group have either a Co-Chair or Vice-Chair. 
266. PNG hoped to be able to provide a Chair or a lead person to get it started, noting that it is 
currently working closely with PNAO and NGOs on this work.  
41 
 
267. Pew Charitable Trusts informed the Commission that Pew had been supporting FAD 
tracking trials and noted that it was pleased to see this working group potentially coming 
into being, and hoped to work constructively in the group and support its efforts. 
268. There was no discussion on the Consultancy proposed in Circular 2014/60. 
269. WCPFC11 agreed to establish a WCPFC FAD Management Options Working 
Group, and that USD100,000 should be allocated in the budget for 2015. WCPFC11 
agreed to the TOR, including amendments (Attachment E). WCPFC11 elected Brian 
Kumasi (PNG) as Chair and Ray Clarke (USA) as Vice-Chair of the FAD 
Management Options Working Group. 
6.1.3 
Reporting on CMM 2013-01 (Secretariat) 
270. The WCPFC Secretariat tabled WCPFC11-2014-14_rev1, summarizing CCM reporting 
under CMM 2013-01, for review by the Commission. 
6.2 
Consideration of CCM proposals related to CMM 2013-01 
6.2.1 
PNA + Tokelau proposal to refine CMM 2013-01 Tropical Tuna CMM 
271. PNA members + Tokelau introduced a proposal to refine CMM 2013-01 (WCPFC11-
2014-DP11) which included four major elements: 
 
para 44 – operational data, which needed to be provided in full and openly, for stock 
assessments, analysis of management options, and for monitoring compliance. 
 
addressing the failure of tropical longline management – proposed provisions for a high 
seas closure period, a ban on transhipment of frozen bigeye at sea to address high seas 
IUU fishing by longliners, a limit on manual reporting in the event of a VMS breakdown, 
independent observers, and further reductions in bigeye catches. 
 
purse seine measures – including banning pre-dawn sets in FAD closure periods, bans on 
FAD deployment by tender vessels, reduction of high seas purse seine effort, bringing 
forward the high seas FAD closure, and limiting the number of FADs deployed by a 
vessel. These additional purse seine measures in PNA EEZs is conditional upon 
operational level catch data being provided and appropriate measures being adopted for 
high seas longlining.  
 
improving the effectiveness of the CMM in ways that also reduce the disproportionate 
burden on SIDS of the existing measures – this includes addressing capacity provisions to 
obstruct SIDS’ domestic development. 
272. PNA members and Tokelau thanked the Chair for chairing the tropical tuna SWG. These 
CCMs noted that WCPFC11-2014-DP11 included proposals to address the failure of the 
longline bigeye catch limits and excessive levels of longline effort, address the 
disproportionate burden on SIDS from the tropical tuna measure, and provide for 
operational data provision. These CCMs were pleased with progress made on operational 
data but expressed disappointment that no progress was made on any other aspects of 
CMM 2013-01.  
273. PNA members reminded participants that, last year, the Commission agreed to adopt 
arrangements at this session to remove the disproportionate burden on SIDS from the 
42 
 
tropical tuna measure. PNA members and Tokelau’s proposals on this were not adopted 
either, with no alternatives proposed. The result is that the Commission is non-compliant 
with one of the central elements of its Convention, and CMM 2013-01 will continue to 
transfer a disproportionate burden of conservation action onto SIDS. 
274. PNA members stated their commitment to effective tropical tuna management. These 
CCMs will continue to improve the effectiveness of the vessel day scheme and increase the 
price of vessel days to strengthen capacity management, and develop FAD tracking, FAD 
registration and FAD charging. 
6.2.2 
Strengthening CMM 2013-01 for bigeye, yellowfin and skipjack (FFA) 
275. Discussions of paper WCPFC11-2014-DP08 are covered under Agenda 6.1. 
6.2.3 
Japan’s comments on PNA members and Tokelau proposal for CMM for bigeye, 
yellowfin and skipjack tuna in the WCPO 
276. Discussions of paper WCPFC11-2014-DP15 are covered under Agenda 6.1. 
6.2.4 
Proposal by Japan on the Joint Reduction Plan of Purse Seine Fishing Capacity in the 
Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) Convention Area 
277. Japan introduced its proposal for a joint reduction plan for purse seine fishing capacity in 
the WCPO (WCPFC11-2014-DP16). As stipulated in para 54 of CMM 2013-01, 
WCPFC10 agreed that CCMs other than SIDS shall jointly develop a scheme to jointly 
reduce the capacity of purse seine vessels larger than 24m with freezing capacity operating 
between 20˚N and 20˚S (LSPSVs), to the level of 31 December 2012 and submit it to 
WCPFC11. The proposal was made as a basis for discussion among non-SIDS CCMs to 
establish the agreeable reduction scheme. The proposed scheme included two 
implementation steps: a) CCMs which increased the number of LSPSVs flying its own flag 
from that of 31 December 2012 shall reduce the equivalent number of LSPSVs flying its 
own flag; and b) further reductions necessary shall be shared on a pro-rata basis of the 
number of LSPSVs flagged to each concerned CCMs of 31 December 2012 in order to 
share burden among those CCMs equally. Japan expressed its hope that there would be 
constructive discussion and rational deliberations on this important issue. Finally, Japan 
stated that the decision had already been made at WCPFC10 and requested the Chair not to 
mix up discussion on implementation of decisions with discussion on revisions to CMM 
2013-01. 
278. Several CCMs commented that Japan’s proposal was a good start but, referencing paras 2 
and 3 of Resolution 2008-01, in which developed CCMs are to make concerted efforts and 
consider innovative options to reduce and or restructure their fleet so as to accommodate 
aspirations of SIDS and Territories to develop their own fisheries, asked Japan for 
clarification about how the proposal assists SIDS to develop their fisheries.  
279. Japan clarified its proposal focuses on para 54 of CMM 2013-01, implementation of 
agreement at WCPFC10 to develop a scheme of capacity reduction. Japan stressed that no 
other CCMs concerned proposed the capacity reduction scheme  
280. USA noted that there were two paragraphs in CMM 2013-01 that deal with capacity plans 
– para 54, which requires non-SIDS CCMs to develop a joint proposal on capacity with 
43 
 
reductions back to 2012 levels for LSPSVs, and para 53 which relates to a capacity plan for 
the Commission, and asked Japan to clarify if the proposal responds to both paras. Japan 
clarified that the proposal related to para 54. 
281. In plenary on 5 December, Japan noted that its vessel reduction scheme proposal did not 
come to a conclusion at this meeting, and Japan is still concerned about the continued 
expansion of purse seiners and excessive FAD utilisation by them. Japan wished to 
continue discussing this issue. 
6.2.5 
Others papers and proposals relevant to CMM 2013-01 
Philippines proposal to use refrigerated vessels 
282. The Philippines presented WCPFC11-2014-DP22, a report on Philippine-flagged vessels 
operating in High Seas Pocket 1, and informed the Commission of its intention to allow its 
vessels operating on the high seas to use refrigerated carrier vessels instead of traditional 
ice chilled vessels to transport their catch to port. This CCM assured the Commission that 
the level of effort will be the same, that this change will not result into addition of effort, 
nor will it be used for the purpose other than transporting the lawful catch of the 36 vessels.  
283. One CCM expressed some concerns about the proposal as presented and commented that 
the exemption the Philippines had been granted was related to traditional activities. This 
CCM was concerned there may be the potential for the practice to grow into other areas. 
284. The Chair asked the Philippines to consult with other CCMs. 
285. USA shared the concerns and asked to be engaged in the Philippines’ consultations. 
286. Based on those consultations, the Philippines reported back to plenary later in WCPFC11. 
This CCM had consulted with FSM, Palau, USA and Chinese Taipei. It was able to provide 
more information and talk about their concerns. The Philippines explained that the proposal 
is linked to the effort to go from a volume-based production to a value-based production, to 
avoid waste of valuable resources. It is linked to the ongoing capacity management 
program of the Philippines, wherein it is now implementing a moratorium on the 
construction of new vessels; this will continue even if the fleet’s capacity reduces and the 
catch of the remaining vessels will be kept at the same level. The Philippines committed to 
submit to TCC similar analysis that was provided to WCPFC11, reflecting the difference in 
volume caught versus wasted. This CCM expressed the view that it has a duty to prevent 
waste, and noted that about 6000mt of tuna is currently being wasted by the use of ice 
chilled carrier vessels. While a change can be made to a regulation, in order to minimise 
the possibility of confusion later on, this CCM proposed an amendment to Annex C of 
CMM 2013-01, deleting the word “ice chilled” next to the Philippines’ fishing vessels.  
287. The Vice-Chair asked whether CCMs wanted to amend CMM 2013-01 to take into account 
this request. One CCM suggested the Commission hold off on a decision and pass it to 
TCC to assess the proposal against the measure and provide a recommendation for the 
Commission. The Vice-Chair noted there was no consensus. 
288. The Philippines reiterated that there remained the problem of waste, possibly 6000mt, and 
stressed that there would be no extra effort, that it was just a matter of preserving the 
quality of the fish. This CCM commented that it might be worth risking a TCC non-
44 
 
compliance report if the Philippines fleet continues to lose 6000mt of tuna, and requested 
the proposal be kindly considered. 
289. The Vice-Chair commented that the meeting did not have a lot of time left and referred the 
issue to TCC11. 
290. The Philippines made a commitment to provide information to the Commission on the 
progress of this issue. This CCM noted that it was proposing to allow its vessels to change 
from ice chilled to refrigerated carriers this year and is weighing the options. The 
Philippines hoped CCMs would take account of the purpose for the change. 
Views from Indonesia 
291. Indonesia expressed its concern regarding the implementation of Article 30 of the 
Convention in relation to interpreting the agreed text under paras 49, 51 and 52 of CMM 
2013-01 and expressed the view that Indonesia should not require any prior 
recommendation from the Secretariat and/or WCPFC members for the construction or 
purchase of longline vessels and/or purse seine vessels. 
Addressing provision of operational level data 
292. On 5 December, Japan announced that Japan, Indonesia, Chinese Taipei, China, 
Philippines, Korea and FFA members had drafted an arrangement on data provision 
(WCPFC11-2014-DP25_rev1) that would alter para 44quinquies, regarding operational 
data provision, in the PNA + Tokelau proposal (WCPFC11-2014-DP11). It would also 
include two footnotes. Japan explained that if the changes were agreed by the Commission 
it could be incorporated into the existing tropical tuna measure (CMM 2013-01).  
293. One CCM thanked the proponents for working hard for an agreement on this thorny issue. 
This CCM needed to review the proposal and raised initial queries about: which countries 
it applied to; what the timeframe for data submission was; whether historical operational 
data would be provided for south of 20˚N, and this differs from data provision  in 1 degree 
square data for the area north of 20˚N; Indonesia’s timeframe and whether there was a 
sunset; whether the CPUE indices would be stratified by 1 degree square per month rather 
than annually; whether it applied to all species or just tropical tuna. 
294. Japan responded that the provisions would relate to all fishing subject to CMM 2013-01; 
the current draft is for future provision of operational level data – historical data is another 
issue, for consultation with FFA members and the Commission and bearing in mind the 
US’s arrangements with SPC; and Indonesia’s domestic law prohibits providing 
operational data at this stage. Japan noted that this was the maximum concession possible 
from Indonesia. 
295. In response to Japan’s query about the proposal’s adoption, the Chair noted that one CCM 
had requested more time to consider the proposed text and the tropical tuna SWG had met 
three times without significant progress, although the issue was still open. In response to a 
query from the Philippines about the operational data proposal, which was part and parcel 
of the tropical tuna amendments, the Chair noted that the proposal will be incorporated into 
a revised CMM 2013-01 if adopted, and noted that the proposal is proposed to replace a 
paragraph in the PNA+Tokelau CMM proposal (WCPFC11-2014-DP11). The Chair 
wonder whether, if the Commission does not make progress on the PNA proposal 
45 
 
(WCPFC11-2014-DP11) after more consultations, a place should be found to insert it into 
the existing measure, or a decision to hold it in abeyance until WCPFC12. The Chair asked 
if delegations were comfortable with finding a place in CMM 2013-01 where the proposal 
could be included. 
296. Japan responded that it was comfortable either way, but noted that it was necessary to 
adopt it this year. Japan suggested separating it from the PNA proposal and focusing on the 
data provision issue. Japan noted it was waiting for comments from USA, which was ready 
to address in the margins of the meeting. 
297. After more discussions at WCPFC11, Japan advised that it could provide a revised version 
of the agreement, after consultations with the USA (WCPFC11-2014-DP25_rev2). 
298. The Chair reiterated his question to CCMs as to whether the Commission agreed to put the 
paragraphs WCPFC11-2014-DP26_rev2 into the existing CMM.  
299. Japan responded to an earlier question about a) the proposal’s application – it was limited 
to the 6 Asian CCMs, noting that other members already provide operational data; and b) 
the exemption of Indonesia – Indonesia has agreed to a 10 year time frame; the agreement 
shall not apply until Indonesia changes its national laws and in any event until no later than 
2025. 
300. The EU sought to understand the added value of the new proposal and the relationship 
between it and the current scientific data provisions, which already refer to the provision of 
operational level catch and effort data. This CCM cautioned that there may need to be 
amendments to ensure consistency between the two measures. The EU observed that there 
was a 3 year grace period, but noted that the tropical tuna measure is only in place until 
2017 so these CCMs appear to have no obligation to provide data for the whole period of 
duration for the measure. So its added value is questionable.  
301. Dr Hampton from SPC asked whether there is any commitment in this proposal to making 
this data available historically for stock assessment purposes. Depending on the 
interpretation of the para on data handling, the data provided would be useful immediately 
for the Commission rather than 10 or 15 years down the track after the data has been 
provided cumulatively. 
302. Japan noted that there are legal constraints in provision of operational data according to the 
current scientific data rules. The main Asian distant water fishing members have domestic 
rules which prohibit the provision of operational data to the Commission, which is why 
there is an exemption clause in the rules. These domestic rules are not just regulated by the 
fishery authority but also by other authorities, therefore it is very hard to change the 
situation. However, these CCMs have sought to accommodate the concerns of the SIDS not 
only for the purpose of stock management but also for the purpose of cooperation to SIDS 
under Article 30 of the Convention. Japan explained that these CCMs’ had made a 
commitment to start to provide the operational data to the Commission and asked that the 
proposal be considered in good faith. In relation to historical data, this proposal only 
stipulates future provision of data. However, these CCMs understood the importance of 
historical data and consider very positively the provision of historical data. Japan 
understood that one CCM recently began providing operational data, together with some 
degree of historical data. 
46 
 
303. Korea said it was happy to join the agreement to supply operational data, noting that it was 
harder for some other CCMs.  
304. EU noted that its question about the footnote was not answered. By the time the grace 
period ends, the measure ends. The EU also asked why the proponents want these 
provisions to sit within the tropical tuna measure and not the data provision measure, which 
doesn’t expire in 2017 and is a permanent obligation. It would be preferable to amend the 
data provision measure instead.  
305. Japan noted that that the proposed arrangement has the footnote for some Asian distant 
water fishing members which have real practical difficulties in providing operational level 
data from 2015. Japan explained that the proposed arrangement is the result of discussions 
among many members and asked CCMs to respect the Asian distant water fishing members’ 
positive intention towards the data provision. 
306. One CCM thanked the CCMs which put the measure together. This CCM explained that 
this was a small step – a number of stocks are not covered and it does not provide all the 
data other countries are providing. This CCM hoped the data could be made more robust, 
and in a rapid fashion, and sought clarification on whether the 1x1 would be provided on a 
monthly basis, and if so this was a clarification that might be useful in the text.  
307. Japan confirmed it was monthly and provided in accordance with the data rules. Original 
language is annual, but the intention is for 1x1 data monthly. 
308. FFA members thanked Japan for its leadership and for noting the concerns of others. This 
was a big compromise for FFA members too and they considered this a starting point, not 
the end point. The scientists are being provided with the data necessary for them to do their 
work. WCPFC11-2014-DP06 attempted to change the rules but it was clear it would not 
receive consensus agreement; as the alternative, this was a good start. 
309. Japan assured CCMs there was no intention to seek a loophole. 
310. The EU commented that it would not oppose adoption if others are satisfied, but noted a 
preference for the FFA proposal (WCPFC11-2014-DP06). This CCM expressed 
disappointment with the lack of a certain delegation to abide by obligations which have 
existed for many years and hoped work continues in the future for full provision of 
operational data. 
311. WCPFC11 agreed that the four paragraphs and two footnotes in WCPFC11-2014-
DP26_rev2 as they were amended on-screen would be included in a revision of CMM 
2013-01. The agreed paragraphs would be inserted after paragraph 55 and within a 
new section III titled ‘Data Provision Requirements’ (Attachment F, CMM 2014-01 
Conservation and Management Measure for bigeye, yellowfin and skipjack in the 
WCPO). 
Addressing outstanding matters in CMM 2013-01  
312. The Chair returned discussions in plenary on 5 December to CMM 2013-01. Referring 
participants to para 25 of CMM 2013-01 on high seas purse seine effort limits, the Chair 
noted that the Commission was required to review these limits at its meeting in 2014 and 
agree on high seas purse effort limits to apply after 2014. The Chair suggested that the 
47 
 
mentions of 2014 in this para should be amended to 2015 so the limits remain effective, 
noting that everything will stay the same except the year.  
313. WCPFC11 agreed to replace references to “2014” with “2015” in paragraphs 25, 28, 
29 and 43. (Attachment F, CMM 2014-01 Conservation and Management Measure 
for bigeye, yellowfin and skipjack in the WCPO). 
314. Indonesia reiterated its proposal to add Indonesia to para 55 of CMM 2013-01:  
“55. Nothing in this measure shall restrict the ability of SIDS to construct or 
purchase vessels from other CCMs for their domestic fleets.” 
315. Japan statedthat there remain some very significant issues to be solved and the Commission 
needs to work intersessionally, noting the serious status of the most important fishing 
resources in the region. Japan sought to clarify its understanding that paragraphs 14, 15 and 
16 in CMM 2013-01 will continue to 2015 with respect to the management and use of 
FADs. 
316. A number of CCMs viewed positively the progress made on operational level data 
provision, though one CCM noted that it was about the only positive thing the meeting 
achieved.  
317. PNA members noted that their efforts tried to add value, but perhaps all that was added is 
more disproportionate burden. PNA members brought a number of issues to the 
Commission again, but these proposals were not taken up. These CCMs stated that aside 
from a small amount of closure on operational data, this meeting has seen a rejection of 
PNA’s efforts and of the SIDS’ interests in the sustainability of the tuna fisheries and their 
future.  
318. Some CCMs expressed concern about bigeye tuna, with one CCM disappointed that FAD 
sets on the high seas were not banned as such FAD sets impinge on the biological status of 
bigeye tuna stocks.  
319. The EU made three points: a) some of these issues were not discussed – they were not 
necessarily rejected; b) a point which is made every year is about the impact of fishing on 
FADs in the high seas, but catches of bigeye tuna in the high seas are very limited 
compared to the catches in the EEZ, so even a total ban on FAD fishing in the High Seas 
will not bring the expected positive impact on the rebuilding of the stock; c) regarding the 
idea to not apply a fourth month FAD closure but impose a fee on the use of FADs, which 
according to the proponents would have a conservation impact comparable or better than 
an actual closure, this delegation could not go along with that because there was no 
scientific evidence; so this CCM could not support the proposal because of conservation 
concerns.  
320. USA noted that some issues were raised for that delegation and Participating Territories, 
and reminded participants that in thinking of the measures the Commission has to think 
about, the Participating Territory American Samoa is quite dependent on the high seas. 
This CCM reiterated that the Participating Territories must be borne in mind as well. 
321. Japan stated it was the fault of all CCMs that little progress was made at WCPFC11. Japan 
reminded the Commission how much effort was allocated to discussions about 
48 
 
conservation and management of the tropical tunas – last year the discussions on revision 
of tropical tunas measure had begun the day before the meeting and finished on the last day 
spending most of the time while this year CCMs allocated themselves perhaps one or two 
days for discussions. 
322. Kiribati reiterated its position on the proposal to move forward on FAD closures on the 
high seas and management of high seas effort, and reminded CCMs of the special case of 
Kiribati when looking at this issue.  
323. Resuming the discussions on CMM 2013-01 after 3:25pm on 5 December, the Vice-Chair 
observed the mixture of disappointment and mild satisfaction of participants with CMM 
2013-01 discussions, and noted that it was unfortunate that the Commission had not 
resolved a number of issues. However, she suggested that this discussion should simply be 
an ongoing one. CCMs will have to meet between this meeting and the next meeting and 
hopefully find some middle ground and bring proposals forward that are well considered. 
The Vice-Chair noted that this was really the Commission’s main task. 
324. FSM asked for clarity around what the tropical tuna measure would look like for 2015, 
noting that there were some agreed amendments. 
325. At the request of the Vice-Chair the Interim-Executive Director reconfirmed that the 
amendments that had been agreed to CMM 2013-01 so far, were: 
 
Edits to four paragraphs (paras 25, 28, 29 and 43) to replace references to 2014 with a 
reference to 2015;  and 
 
To include a new section in CMM 2013-01 based on the discussion of the four 
paragraphs in WCPFC11-2014-DP25_rev2; the new section would be added after 
paragraph 55. 
326. CCMs noted other provisions in CMM 2013-01, noting that these also needed to be further 
discussed and possibly amended. These included: 
a. Noting that the last sentence in para 56 could be simply changed to 2015; 
b. If amendments were required to paras 40 and 41 on longline catch allocations; 
c. If amendments or decisions had been been made to paragraphs 26, 15 and 50; 
and 
d. Whether para 15 can be amended to specify that the FAD closure should be 
based on UTC time. 
327. The Interim-Executive Director responded that whilst there have been proposals tabled at 
WCPFC11 on these matters, which were discussed in the CMM 2013-01 working group, it 
was not the Secretariat’s understanding that any changes to the above paragraphs had yet 
been agreed at WCPFC11. For example,  in the SWG there was some support for including 
a reference to confirm that the FAD closure periods should be UTC time, but as the 
working group did not come back to plenary with agreed text, at this stage the Secretariat 
did not understand that any other changes had yet been agreed.  
328. Some CCMs stated their understanding that the arrangements related to disproportionate 
burden in paragraph 15 of CMM 2014-01 had not been agreed at WCPFC11.  
Consequently the fifth month FAD closure and alternative FAD set limits in paragraph 17 
would not apply until such time as these arrangements are agreed by the Commission.   
49 
 
329. The Vice-Chair remarked that these issues were not being reopened but the discussion was 
to ensure there is a common understanding about what applies in 2015. 
 
AGENDA  ITEM  7  -  REPORT OF THE TENTH SESSION  
OF THE SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE 
7.1 
Report of the tenth regular session of the Scientific Committee (SC10) 
330. The SC Chair, Mr Ludwig Kumoru (PNG), highlighted key issues from the Executive 
Summary of the SC10 report (WCPFC11-2014-16b_rev 1) for the attention of the 
Commission. SC10 was held in Majuro, Republic of Marshall Islands from 6 – 14 August 
2014. The SC Chair explained that recommendations to SC or recommendations relating to 
the work of the Scientific Services Provider, SPC, would not be presented unless they 
carried financial implications.  
Data and statistics theme 
331. Regarding the inclusion of a reference to Section 6 of “Scientific Data to be provided to the 
Commission” in any revision of CMM 2012-05 (paragraph 82.b, SC10 Summary Report), 
the WCPFC Chair noted that there is currently no proposal to modify this measure, but 
proposed that when the measure is next re-opened, this recommendation be taken into 
account. 
332. Regarding feedback from industry on purse seine catch sampling (paragraph 100.b, SC10 
Summary Report), the WCPFC Chair urged CCMs and those industry groups present to 
contact the Secretariat to obtain information about the spill sampling approach, and to 
provide feedback to Secretariat on the implications and constraints to moving to such an 
approach. 
333. Regarding the submission of ROP-defined observer data (paragraph 120.b, SC10 Summary 
Report), the Commission was informed that this year’s CMR process took this matter into 
account.  
334. The Commission noted the support of SC10 for e-reporting and e-monitoring in paragraph 
139 of the SC10 Summary Report. 
Stock Assessment Theme 
335. Dr Shelton Harley (SPC-OFP) briefly presented the results of seven stock assessments 
conducted in 2014 by SPC and ISC, and highlighted the current status and management 
advice as follows.  
Bigeye tuna 
336. Stock status is detailed in paragraphs 186-192 of the SC10 Summary Report. The spawning 
biomass of WCPO bigeye tuna breached the biomass LRP in 2012. SC10 advised that the 
stock was overfished and rebuilding would require a reduction in fishing mortality. 
50 
 
337. Management advice is found in paras 193-200 of the SC10 Summary Report. SC10 
recommended that:  
 
fishing mortality on WCPO bigeye tuna be reduced. A 36% reduction in fishing 
mortality from the average levels for 2008–2011 would be expected to return the 
fishing mortality rate to FMSY. This reduction of at least 36% should also allow 
the stock to rebuild above the LRP over a period of time. This recommended level 
of reduction in fishing mortality could also be stated as a minimum 33% reduction 
from the 2004 level of fishing mortality, or a minimum 26% reduction from the 
average 2001–2004 level of fishing mortality. 
 
all operational data, including high seas data, should be made available for future 
stock assessments.  
 
the Commission consider the results of updated projections at WCPFC11, 
including an evaluation of the potential impacts of CMM 2013-01, to determine 
whether the CMM will achieve its objectives and allow the bigeye tuna stock to 
rebuild above the LRP. 
Yellowfin tuna 
338. Stock status is found in paragraphs 244-251 of the SC10 Summary Report. SC10 
concluded that yellowfin spawning biomass is above the biomass-based LRP that WCPFC 
adopted of 0.2SBF=0 and overall fishing mortality appears to be below FMSY. It is highly 
likely that the stock is not experiencing overfishing and is not in an overfished state. 
339. Management advice is found in paras 252-257 of the SC10 Summary Report. SC10 
recommended that the catch of WCPO yellowfin tuna should not be increased from 2012 
levels, which exceeded MSY, and measures should be implemented to maintain current 
spawning biomass levels until the Commission can agree on an appropriate target reference 
point. 
Skipjack tuna 
340. Stock status is found in paragraphs 303-318 of the SC10 Summary Report. Recent catches 
are slightly above MSY. The assessment continues to show that the stock is currently only 
moderately exploited (Fcurrent/FMSY = 0.61) and fishing mortality levels are sustainable. 
However, the continuing increase in fishing mortality and decline in stock size are 
recognized. 
341. Management advice is found in paragraphs 314-318 of the SC10 Summary Report. SC10 
recommended that: 
 
further research on range contraction of skipjack tuna be conducted in the 
framework of Project 67. 
 
the Commission take action to avoid further increases in fishing mortality and to 
keep the skipjack tuna stock around the current levels, with tighter purse seine 
control rules and advocates for the adoption of TRPs and harvest control rules. 
 
the Commission consider the results of updated projections at WCPFC11, 
including the evaluation of the potential impacts of CMM 2013-01 in order to 
determine whether the CMM will achieve its objectives, including impacts of the 
skipjack tuna fishery on bigeye and yellowfin tunas. 
 
51 
 
South Pacific albacore tuna 
342. No stock assessment was undertaken in 2014. SC10 recommended that longline fishing 
mortality and longline catches be reduced to avoid further decline in the vulnerable 
biomass and possibly exceeding the biomass LRP, and so that economically viable catch 
rates can be maintained.  
North Pacific albacore tuna 
343. In paragraph 362 of the SC10 Summary Report, SC10 noted that ISC provided conclusions 
that the North Pacific albacore stock is healthy and that current productivity is sufficient to 
sustain recent exploitation. There were no specific recommendations to the Commission on 
this stock.  
Pacific bluefin tuna 
344. In paragraph 380 of the SC10 Summary Report, SC10 noted that the current (2012) Pacific 
bluefin biomass level is near historically low levels and experiencing high exploitation 
rates above all biological reference points except for Floss. There were no specific 
recommendations to the Commission on this stock. 
Western and Central North Pacific swordfish 
345. Paragraph 390 of the SC10 Summary Report reported that an assessment was undertaken 
for Western and Central North Pacific Ocean (WCNPO) swordfish. Based on the 
assessment update, the WCNPO stock is not currently overfished and is not experiencing 
overfishing. The WCNPO stock is not fully exploited. 
Blue shark in the North Pacific 
346. Advice for blue shark in the North Pacific was complex and two different methods were 
used to assess the stock. In paragraph 462 of the SC10 Summary Report, the North Pacific 
blue shark stock is likely not experiencing overfishing and likely not to be in an overfished 
condition. However, in paragraph 464, SC10 noted that there is substantial uncertainty in 
the model results and the Commission should be cautious in interpreting the results. 
347. In paragraph 467 and 468 of the SC10 Summary Report, SC10 recommended that: 
 
all targeted shark fisheries be required to submit management plans with robust 
catch limits to the Commission by WCPFC12; and 
 
the catch and fishing effort on blue shark be carefully monitored, and 5% longline 
observer coverage and biological and ecological research continued. 
 
348. There was no discussion in relation to these recommendations. 
Other recently assessed stocks 
349. The Commission received reports on other recently assessed stocks as follows: 
 
 
52 
 
a) Southwest Pacific swordfish (2013) 
The South Pacific swordfish assessment was highly sensitive to growth assumptions. Two 
different growth models, one from Australia (GA) and the other from Hawaii (GH), were 
included in alternative model runs. SC could not make a definitive statement about which 
of these two assumptions was more reliable. Assessment runs using the GA growth data 
indicated that overfishing was occurring but that the stock was not in an overfished state. 
Assessment runs using the GH growth data indicate that no overfishing is occurring and 
that the stock is not in an overfished state. 
b) Southwest Pacific striped marlin (2012)  
The stock is fully exploited, is not experiencing overfishing, but may be overfished. 
c) North Pacific striped marlin (2012)  
The stock is overfished and experiencing overfishing. 
d) Silky shark (2013) 
Overfishing is occurring. It is highly likely that the stock is in an overfished state. 
 
e) Oceanic whitetip shark (2012) 
Overfishing is occurring and the stock is in an overfished state.  
f) Pacific blue marlin (2013) 
The stock is not currently overfished and is not experiencing overfishing. However, the 
stock is nearly fully exploited. 
350. The Commission received a brief summary of stock status split into two groups:  
a) Stabilize / Maintain / No increase:  
 
Skipjack tuna 
 
Yellowfin tuna 
 
Southwest Pacific swordfish 
 
Pacific Blue marlin 
b) Rebuild stock / Reduce catch: 
 
Bigeye tuna 
 
Pacific bluefin tuna 
 
South Pacific albacore tuna 
 
Southwest Pacific striped marlin 
 
North Pacific striped marlin 
 
Silky shark 
 
Oceanic whitetip shark 
351. The Chair noted the number of species in the ‘rebuild’ column. 
53 
 
352. Korea expressed appreciation to SPC and member states that participated in the stock 
assessments for major tropical tuna species in the WCPO. It noted that the stock 
assessment for bigeye tuna shows that stock status is below the LRP and there is a growing 
need for conservation of the stock. Korea asked whether the Scientific Services Provider 
could further analyse the impact of the purse seine and longline fishery on bigeye tuna 
stock. In response, SPC pointed out that Figure BET4 in the SC10 Summary Report may 
best answer the question at this stage. This is an analysis of impact by region and by gear 
on the spawning biomass of bigeye tuna.  
353. Japan expressed particular concern that current spawning stock biomass of bigeye has 
breached the LRP and the provisional catch taken by the purse seine fishery in 2013 was 
the highest on record. Japan noted that the number of FAD sets in 2013 still exceeded 2010 
levels, even though SC10 reaffirmed the recommendation of SC8 that the Commission 
consider a reduction of the total number of FAD sets to the level no greater than those in 
the fishery in 2010. Japan also expressed its concerns on the continuing increase in fishing 
mortality and decline in stock size of skipjack tuna and reiterated that the high catches in 
the equatorial area is causing local depletion of skipjack tuna, thus. Japan is expecting quite 
a low catch of this species based on recent years catches in its coastal area. Japan reminded 
the Commission that NC10 sent its strong concerns to the Commission regarding the plight 
of tropical tuna stocks, not only because those species are being caught in northern areas 
but also the status of these stocks could impact management of other species through target 
shifts. Japan also reminded the Commission that NC10 requested the Commission to 
instruct SC11 to prioritize the work on determination of the designation of North Pacific 
blue shark as a northern stock. 
354. China commented that the stock assessment for South Pacific albacore took place 3 years 
ago; all the management advice and recommendations are based on old stock assessments. 
It asked what follow-on activities were planned for South Pacific albacore in future years, 
noting that a good grounding is needed to develop appropriate management measures. 
China observed that the South Pacific albacore proposal being deliberated at WCPFC11 
would set catch limits for this species, but WCPFC doesn’t have MSY or a stock status for 
the species. 
355. The Chair confirmed that the Scientific Services Provider will be working on a South 
Pacific albacore stock assessment in 2015. SC11 will receive and discuss the results of that 
assessment. 
356. With reference to the figure of estimates of reduction in spawning potential of bigeye due 
to fishing (Figure BET4), Japan asked how to interpret 100% on the x-axis (impact) in the 
figure. SPC confirmed that the closer to 100% on that axis, the higher the proportion of 
spawning population has been removed due to fishing. 100% would mean no spawning 
biomass is left. SPC pointed out that for the total region it is just over 80%, which is where 
the estimate of stock status is obtained. In response to a follow-up question from Japan, 
SPC confirmed that the figure of estimates of reduction in spawning potential of skipjack 
tuna due to fishing (Figure SKJ4) shows that 80% of the spawning population of skipjack 
tuna in Region 4 and 5 has been removed due to fishing. In response to Korea’s query 
about whether Figure BET4 could include separation of impacts by vessel size category 
(small, medium and large scale vessels), SPC explained that the different fisheries are only 
separated into longline and purse seine, irrespective of size. However, ‘other’ refers to 
smaller scale fisheries which operate in the west of the region. 
54 
 
Management issues theme 
357. In 2013, the Commission tasked SC to undertake further work to inform a decision on risk. 
SC10 recommended that WCPFC11 identify the level of acceptable risk that should be 
applied to breaching an LRP for the key target species. SC10 noted that the UN Fish Stocks 
Agreement states that the risk of exceeding LRPs should be very low. 
358. The WCPFC Chair invited members to consider sending this recommendation to a small 
working group or deferring it until 2015. 
359. FFA members stated, as they did at WCPFC10, that deciding a level of acceptable risk 
around breaching LRPs is a management issue and WCPFC cannot keep passing it back to 
SC. These CCMs noted that the Commission asked SC10 to clarify the implications of 
accepting alternative levels of risk, and SC10 has provided that guidance, which has been 
further considered by MOW3, and the Commission should make this decision. 
360. SC10 reviewed work on shark LRPs and made two recommendations: 
a) That the Commission support the tiered, species-specific approach that is similar to 
that adopted for target species but noted that more work would be required to specify the 
values of the LRPs for key shark species, and to ensure consistency with article 10.1(c) of 
the Convention; 
b) That the Commission support the proposal to hold an expert working group to compile 
and review life history data for use in LRPs for sharks. 
361. The WCPFC Chair noted that there is a USD 25,000 proposed workshop budget in the 
Commission budget. 
362. The following recommendation in paragraph 565 of the SC10 Summary Report relates to 
papers that were presented at both SC10 and MOW3 to inform consideration of target 
reference points: 
565.  
Noting the request from the Commission for the scientific services provider to 
provide the third meeting of the Management Objectives Workshop (MOW3) with 
further analyses required to inform the Commission’s consideration and adoption of a 
TRPs and harvest control rules (HCR) at WCPFC 11, SC10 reviewed working paper 
SC10-MI-WP-09. SC10 also reviewed three working papers (SC10-MI-WP-02, SC10-MI-
WP-03 and SC10-MI-WP-04) which had previously been presented to MOW2 together 
with a new analysis of the possibility of range contraction in the WCPO provided in 
working paper SC10-MI-WP-06. SC10 supported these analyses and recommends that 
WCPFC11 take the results of these papers into consideration when considering the 
adoption of any TRPs and HCRs for the key target species. 
363. The WCPFC Chair noted that this was discussed in the MOW and when the Commission 
considers the CMM proposals it should be aware of the advice provided in MOW3. 
364. The SC Chair noted information in section 5.3 of CMM 2013-01, MOW3 papers, and the 
SPC presentation at WCPFC11 which should be used to inform consideration of the 
tropical tuna measure. 
55 
 
Ecosystem and bycatch mitigation theme 
365. Regarding an external review of the spatial ecosystem and population dynamics model 
(SEAPODYM) project in paragraph 598, the Commission endorsed this recommendation.  
366. Regarding SC10 recommendations on shark mitigations in paragraph 625 a - d, the 
Commission responded as follows: 
a) SC10 recommends the Commission consider the analysis of longline shark mitigation 
methods (e.g. hook type, leader material, non-deployment of shallow hooks, and a 
prohibition on shark lines) presented in EB-WP-01, as well as additional modeling of 
combinations of these measures and post-release mortality if available, in order to 
inform WCPFC11’s further consideration of revising shark CMMs to incorporate shark 
mitigation requirements that reduce catch rates and at-vessel mortality. 
367. The WCPFC Chair suggested that the work recommended in subparagraph a) should be 
considered when working on the shark proposals before the Commission. 
b) SC10 recommends the Commission task TCC with identifying barriers to implementing 
the mitigation methods raised in SC10-EB-WP-05 (e.g. costs, operational issues and 
safety), along with any considerations raised by WCPFC11, and develop solutions, where 
appropriate. 
368. WCPFC11 agreed to add identifying barriers to implementing the mitigation methods 
raised in SC10-EB-WP-05 along with any considerations raised by WCPFC11, and 
develop solutions where appropriate, to TCC’s agenda. 
c) SC10 recommends the Commission note that SC will not be able to review the 
specification of the ratio of fin weight to shark weight as described in para 8 of CCM 2010-
07 because of the lack of reliable data and of appropriate species- and fleet-specific 
methodology. 
d) SC10 recommends the Commission request that for CCMs that apply fin-to-carcass 
weight ratios, these CCMs report to the Commission the details of the methods used to 
estimate the ratio of shark fin-to-carcass weight and CCMs should encourage its purse 
seine and longline observers to collect data related to shark fin-to-carcass ratios. This 
information should be included in Part 2 of the Annual Reports to WCPFC. 
369. The SC Chair noted in respect of recommendations in c) and d) in paragraph 625 of the 
SC10 Summary Report, that SC did not have sufficient information to review fin weight to 
shark weight ratios. 
370. The EU highlighted SC’s view that it is impossible to monitor the fins to carcass ratio 
because of a lack of reliable data, and stated that this methodology does not work and the 
Commission should no longer use this way of monitoring whether finning is occurring or 
not. 
371. Japan noted the importance of data collection on shark fin ratios and expressed its intention 
to review the specification of the ratio based on the data in the future SC meeting.  
56 
 
372. The Commission noted SC10’s priorities for shark research and that there were budgetary 
implications associated for a) and b) below: 
a) Monte Carlo simulation of mitigation options (see SC10-EB-WP-01 for details). 
b) Expert panel work on the identification of appropriate life history parameters for use in 
developing shark LRPs.  
c) Desktop examination of fin-to-carcass ratios (building on work underway by New 
Zealand). 
373. SC10 identified several seabird research areas in paragraphs 661 and 662. The WCPFC 
Chair suggested that these research priorities could be discussed during the deliberations at 
WCPFC11 to modify the seabird measure. 
Other issues 
374. The Commission noted that SC10 and the Scientific Services Provider agreed that the 2015 
service agreement will include the following: 
a. Pacific-wide bigeye stock assessment 
b. South Pacific albacore stock assessment 
c. Indicator analyses for key shark species 
d. Development of Shark Research Plan 
e. Update of stock assessment for WCPO bigeye incorporating 2013 data in projection 
mode. 
375. Japan reminded the Commission of the NC10 request which had been adopted by the 
Commission regarding “the Commission to instruct SC11 to prioritize the work on 
determination of the designation of North Pacific blue shark as a northern stock, including 
a prompt establishment of criteria and process for the designation of northern stocks 
(paragraph 82, NC10 Summary Report).”  
376. The Interim-Executive Director advised that while the paragraph was adopted, it appears 
that the WCPFC does not currently hold the data necessary for this assessment to be 
undertaken. There is a problem with how this paragraph will be implemented. Japan 
responded that the NC also requested that the ISC to provide relevant information for the 
SC’s consideration of this issue at SC11 (paragraph 82, NC10 Summary Report). 
377. The WCPFC Chair encouraged CCMs which hold data on blue shark to pass that data to 
the Commission. SC11 will receive a report from ISC, noting WCPFC11 adopted para 82 
of the NC10 report. 
378. The Secretariat briefly introduced a proposal submitted by SC Chair and SC theme 
conveners to hire two additional rapporteurs for Scientific Committee meetings in order to 
free up the Convenors to concentrate on the scientific work of the Committee and leading 
their sessions, rather than drafting their theme reports. The proposal was costed at USD 
40,000 to hire two additional professional support rapporteurs, including expenses. 
57 
 
379. FFA members supported the approach as long as there are no additional costs associated. 
This could be achieved through greater use of Secretariat staff to provide support in the 
development of the SC report. These CCMs encouraged the SC to review its current 
structure and operations. Although restructured a few years ago, there is a need to develop 
mechanisms to ensure that the scientific advice being provided to the Commission is not 
politicised. Efficiency gains could be made by streamlining the meeting to focus on its core 
work and activities tasked by the Commission, to reduce the meeting length. 
380. Several CCMs suggested that Secretariat staff can help, along with participating scientists 
as other RFMOs do, and that the proposal had significant budget implications. 
381. Regarding the election of SC officers in paragraph 720, the WCPFC Chair reminded 
delegations that the Chair and Vice-Chair positions for SC are open and that there has not 
been an SC Vice-Chair for several years. FFA has recommended that the current Chair, 
Ludwig Kumoru (PNG), be re-elected to that position.  
382. The Chair confirmed that the next two SC meetings were proposed to be held in Pohnpei 
(2015) and Indonesia (2016). 
7.2 
Future work programme and budget for 2015-2017 
383. The SC Chair noted that the following items in the SC budget are changes, and highlighted: 
 
Project 35: an increase of USD 50,000 to begin analysing bigeye samples 
collected. 
 
Project 57: workshop for developing limit reference points for sharks. 
 
Project 74: proposed Pacific-wide stock assessment; extra costs relating to 
collaboration with IATTC and model developments. 
 
Shark mitigation: work identified as high priority to help quantify potential 
impact of mitigation. 
 
Project 67: examining data from skipjack fisheries outside the main tropical 
area.  
384. The WCPFC Chair noted that this will be considered at FAC. 
385. WCPFC11 accepted the Summary Report of the Tenth Regular Annual Session of the 
Scientific Committee.  
 
58 
 
AGENDA  ITEM  8  -  REPORT OF THE TENTH SESSION OF THE 
NORTHERN COMMITTEE 
8.1 
Report of the Tenth Regular Session of the Northern Committee (NC) 
386. Mr Masanori Miyahara (Japan), NC Chair, summarized the outcomes of NC10 
(WCPFC11-2014-17), which was held in Fukuoka, Japan, from 1-4 September 2014. 
Seven NC CCMs and eight observer CCMs participated. 
North Pacific bluefin 
 
387. After considering the latest ISC Pacific bluefin tuna stock assessment, NC10 adopted a 
draft CMM for Pacific bluefin tuna and submitted it to the Commission for adoption. The 
NC Chair noted that advice on Pacific bluefin tuna was very clear – there was only one 
way to ensure the recovery of this stock, a 50% reduction in Pacific bluefin tuna catch, 
sized less than 30kg from the 2002-2004 average levelsNC agreed to initial goal of 
rebuilding the SSB to the historical median within 10 years from 2015 with at least 60% 
probability. NC also agreed to consider and develop, at its meetings in 2015 and 2016, 
reference points and harvest control rules for the long-term management of Pacific bluefin 
tuna.  
North Pacific albacore 
 
388. The NC Chair reported ISC’s latest stock assessment for North Pacific albacore, which 
showed the stock is healthy and current productivity is sufficient to sustain the recent level 
of exploitation, assuming average historical recruitment continues. NC10 adopted a 
decision regarding the precautionary management framework for North Pacific albacore. 
North Pacific swordfish  
 
389. The NC Chair reported ISC’s latest stock assessment for North Pacific swordfish, which 
showed that the stock is not subject to overfishing, nor overfished. As a result, discussion 
on a management framework was deferred until the North Pacific albacore work is 
completed and endorsed by the Commission. 
Other issues 
390. 
The NC Chair also noted the following issues considered by NC10: 
 
Tropical tuna species: NC10 again expressed strong concern regarding tropical tuna 
stocks, not only because those species are being caught in the Northern area but also 
because the status of those species could impact management of other species through 
target shift. 
 
Sharks: NC10 agreed to request the Commission to instruct SC to prioritize the work on 
determination of the designation of North Pacific blue shark as a northern stock, 
including a prompt establishment of criteria and process for the designation of northern 
stock. NC10 requested ISC to provide relevant information for SC’s consideration. 
 
North Pacific Striped Marlin: No discussion. 
 
Seabirds: NC10 agreed to encourage NC members to provide necessary information to 
evaluate the effect of the exemption of seabird mitigation measure for small scale vessels. 
 
Sea turtles: No discussion.  
 
Regional Observer Programme: NC members were requested to review the 
implementation of the ROP in the NC area and report to NC11. 
59 
 
 
Vessel Monitoring System: No discussion. 
 
391. The NC Chair reported on other matters and noted the following: 
 
NC will continue to review the current management framework for North Pacific 
albacore through 2015-2016, then consider the results of the new stock assessment in 
2017, at which time the NC will overhaul the current management measures.  
 
If the Commission adopts the draft CMM for Pacific bluefin tuna, NC proposes in 2015 
to review CCM reports on domestic management and trade. In 2016 there will be a new 
stock assessment. NC may need to consider emergency measures in the event the stock 
assessment shows a recruitment drop. NC may also consider a CDS for Pacific bluefin. 
 
Masanori Miyahara (Japan) and Mike Tosatto (USA) were nominated as Chair and Vice-
Chair candidates, respectively, through NC12.  
 
Japan offered to host NC11 in early September 2015 at a place to be confirmed. 
 
Upon verification of Fiji’s catch reports by SC11, Fiji will become a new member of NC. 
 
392. The NC Chair submitted Attachment C of the NC10 report draft Conservation and 
Management Measure to establish a multi-annual rebuilding plan for Pacific bluefin tuna 
for the Commission’s consideration and adoption (WCPFC11-2014-18). 
393. Several CCMs supported the draft CMM being formally adopted by WCPFC11. 
394. Chinese Taipei stated that Pacific bluefin is an important species to this CCM and the 
Commission, and expressed concern about the species’ stock status, noting that the stock 
biomass is close to historic low levels. This CCM reiterated the ISC advice that the decline 
of spawning stock biomass is mostly impacted by the taking of too many juveniles. 
Adoption of the draft CMM was necessary to reduce juvenile catch to 2002-2004 levels. 
395. Canada offered views on two NC stocks: a) Pacific bluefin – the existing measure is only 
in place for 2014 and with the stock status less than 4% of its unfished biomass, a 
comprehensive measure was needed. The draft CMM includes short term measures, 
particularly reducing fishing mortality of juveniles and, over the longer term, the 
development of a stock rebuilding programme, and should work well with the IATTC 
measure; b) North Pacific albacore – the 2014 ISC stock assessment shows the stock in 
quite a healthy state, making it an opportune time to begin discussions on management 
frameworks. Progress was made at NC to agree to an LRP, an overall management 
objective, and some decision rules if the LRP is breached. An LRP of 20% of the spawning 
stock biomass was agreed. This CCM was pleased with progress towards a management 
strategy evaluation, noting synergies between NC management objectives work and the 
MOW. 
396. Japan noted that the draft measure for Pacific bluefin was adopted at NC considering the 
stock status, which is currently at its historically lowest level. Japan reminded the 
Commission that IATTC was requested to introduce a compatible measure in the eastern 
Pacific Ocean and it has adopted measures for 2015-2016, introducing a 40% reduction of 
the commercial catch in October 2014. To facilitate a rapid recovery of the stock, Japan 
urged the Commission to adopt the draft measure recommended by NC. Japan reported to 
the Commission that in March 2014, the government of Japan decided to reduce its catches 
of Pacific bluefin tuna less than 30 kg to 50% of the 2002-2004 annual average level from 
2015 and held consultations at more than 50 sites across Japan with its fishermen to explain 
to them the importance of the managementJapan also reported that it is developing a timely 
monitoring system.  
60 
 
397. FFA members expressed appreciation for the focus on future management to rebuild the 
stock to desirable levels, and noted the strong link between the Pacific bluefin rebuilding 
plan and the harvest strategies FFA have proposed for all major stocks. FFA members also 
supported the recommended management arrangement for North Pacific albacore, and 
were pleased to see the recommendation of a spawning stock biomass LRP, which is 
consistent with the Commission’s decisions on skipjack, yellowfin, bigeye and South 
Pacific albacore. These CCMs noted that SC has raised concerns about aspects of the stock 
assessment for North Pacific albacore and looked forward to continued improvement to 
allow the management strategy evaluation approach anticipated by the NC. 
8.1.1 
Recommendations and advice 
398. WCPFC11 adopted CMM 2014-04: Conservation and Management Measure to 
establish a multi-annual rebuilding plan for Pacific bluefin tuna (Attachment G).  
399. In response to NC10s request, WCPFC11 agreed to task SC11 to prioritise work on 
determining the designation of North Pacific blue shark as a northern stock, 
including establishing a criteria and process for the designation of northern stocks. 
WCPFC11 noted that the NC has requested the ISC to provide relevant information 
for the SC’s consideration of this issue at SC11.  
400. Mexico noted that it expects that countries involved in the fishery will take the necessary 
steps to ensure the CMM is effective. However, Mexico expressed its concern that the 
measures are not sufficient and voiced concerns along the following lines: a) ISC advice on 
juvenile catch warned NC that reductions should be effected not only on Pacific bluefin 
tunas weighing less than 30 kg, but across the range of juvenile sizes; therefore the CMM 
adopted does not take account of the scientific advice. Mexico expressed the hope that 
WCPFC considers this management advice next year, and noted that reducing catch for 
juvenile Pacific bluefin tuna allows fleets catching bigger tunas to increase their catches, so 
the benefit to the stock will be lower than expected; c) adult Pacific bluefin also urgently 
requires protection; d) protecting the spawning stock biomass, estimated to be below 5%, is 
urgently required, since it is doubtful that such low levels will produce high recruitments. 
401. The EU expressed disappointment at the lack of ambition of the WCPFC Pacific bluefin 
measure and, while not opposing its adoption, noting delegations were not given a chance 
to change it, considered that the Commission could have done better than rebuilding the 
stock to its historical median spawning biomass within 10 years with a 60% probability. As 
the Pacific bluefin stock has been heavily depleted for many years, the measure is not 
expected to have a sufficient impact on the rebuilding of the stock. WCPFC should have 
aimed at rebuilding the stock to a higher percentage of the unfished biomass. This CCM 
noted that member countries of ICCAT jointly agreed to significant catch reductions on 
bluefin tuna; they decided collectively to take an ambitious approach that is bearing 
tangible results. The EU expressed the view that WCPFC is not on the same track. 
8.2 
Future work programme for Northern Committee 
402. There was no specific discussion on this item. 
403. WCPFC11 accepted the Summary Report of the Tenth Regular Annual Session of the 
Northern Committee.  
61 
 
 
AGENDA  ITEM  9  -  REPORT OF THE TENTH TECHNICAL AND 
COMPLIANCE COMMITTEE 
9.1 
Report of the Tenth Regular Session of the Technical and Compliance Committee 
(TCC10) 
404. Ms Rhea Moss-Christian (FSM), TCC Chair, summarized the outcomes of TCC10, held 
25-30 September 2014 in Pohnpei, FSM.  
9.1.1 
Compliance with Conservation and Management Measures - Report on Compliance 
Monitoring Scheme 
405. The TCC Chair noted that Agenda item 9.1.1 also relates to the Provisional Compliance 
Monitoring Report (CMR) which TCC10 adopted and has forwarded to the Commission 
for adoption. During WCPFC11 reviews of compliance scores for individual CCMs as 
contained in the Provisional CMR, taking into account any new information submitted by 
CCMs 30 days before WCPFC11, would be done through a small working group led by the 
TCC Vice-Chair.  
406. The TCC Chair advised that in addition to the Provisional Compliance Report, there were 
two groups of recommendations from TCC10 related to the Compliance Monitoring 
Scheme which should be considered by the Commission: those which were substantive and 
those which were process or administration-related. She also noted that there were some 
ROP-related CMR recommendations made by TCC10, but noted that TCC10 has 
recommended these matters be forwarded to the IWG-ROP for further discussion and 
resolution, rather than being tabled for discussion at this Commission regular session.  
Substantive Recommendations arising from the Compliance Monitoring Scheme process 
407. The TCC Chair advised that this group of recommendations related to matters where there 
was some difficulty at TCC, due to differing interpretations among CCMs. While 
compliance scores were made in 2014 by TCC, and are reflected in the Provisional 
Compliance Monitoring Report recommended by TCC10, difficulties had been noted in the 
Executive Summary and in the TCC10 summary report. TCC10 is seeking guidance and 
decisions on interpretation of these obligations to assist them in future compliance reviews.  
i. 
TCC10 recommends that WCPFC11 discuss the difference in interpretation of 
paragraph 3 of Scientific Data to be Provided to the Commission, as a priority 
concern with a view to resolving this as soon as possible (para 55).  
408. The TCC Chair noted that the issue of operational and aggregated data provision has been 
an issue for TCC in conducting its compliance assessments for at least two years.  
409. In response to a query from the Chair about whether this issue would be covered by the 
measure being brought forward by the FFA, RMI confirmed this was likely and discussion 
could take place under negotiations of the measure, and then brought back to the group.  
410. Japan stated that it fully recognizes the importance of operational data in terms of science, 
thus has established a cooperative arrangement with SPC through which its operational 
data is used for stock assessments. Japan also stated that compliance in provision of 
62 
 
operational data should be discussed based on the related paragraph in the data provision 
rule. Japan reminded the Commission that the related paragraph in the data provision rule 
(Section 3) stipulates CCMs which cannot provide operational data due to domestic legal 
constraints shall provide aggregated data and concluded that non-provision of operational 
data itself does not constitute non-compliance as long as aggregated data are provided.  
ii. 
TCC10 recommends that WCPFC11 should discuss the interpretation of paragraph 
10 of CMM 2012-01 with respect to the obligations and how those obligations should 
be assessed for compliance (para 64(iii)).   
411. The TCC Chair noted that in relation to para 10 of CMM 2012-01 (FAD closures), there 
were questions around what constitutes compliance and how it should be assessed. 
412. In response to a query from the Chair, the TCC Vice-Chair, Alexa Cole (USA), advised 
that this issue related to cases when a CCM’s vessel was found to be in violation of the 
measure, and at what point the CCM becomes compliant. The TCC Vice-Chair advised that 
she was clarifying this in the proposed CMM for Compliance Monitoring Scheme she was 
drafting, which makes it clear that in investigating or prosecuting and taking the necessary 
steps as a flag state, they would be compliant.  
413. The EU stated that it had a different view of how this measure should be interpreted and 
would discuss this with other members in the small working group. 
414. Japan requested that the Commission should also discuss how to implement the definition 
of a FAD practically during the FAD closure period. Japan stated that para 3 of CMM 
2009-02 provides that the FAD can be an object of any size and extreme implementation of 
the definition led to several members being alleged to be non-compliant with the FAD 
closure requirement at TCC10. Japan stressed that it was not challenging the FAD 
definition itself but wanted to open up a discussion about its practical implementation in 
the Commission. In response to a question, Japan responded that rigorous application of the 
FAD definition to purse seine fishing will stop its operation in the FAD closure period 
because if even the smallest object is observed, which is impossible to spot during the set, 
after the set the vessel could be alleged to contravene FAD closure requirement.  
415. PNA members noted that the third PNA Implementing Arrangement and its 
implementation in their national waters should also be a consideration in these matters. 
iii. 
TCC10 recommends that WCPFC11 should discuss the interpretation of paragraph 
48 of CMM 2013-01 with respect to the obligation to provide the necessary catch and 
effort data and how these obligations should be assessed at TCC11 for compliance 
(para 64(iv)). 
416. The Interim-Executive Director advised that para 48 is one of three paras in CMM 2013-01 
that relate to ‘other commercial fisheries for skipjack, bigeye and yellowfin’ (gears and 
fisheries, other than purse seine and longline fisheries). She observed that the challenge 
TCC and the Secretariat faces in this section is that the limits that are placed on ‘other 
commercial fisheries’ in CMM 2013-01 are: level of fishing effort or capacity or vessel 
numbers, however, in general the information that is made available has been catch data. 
Under the requirements of CMM 2013-01, CCMs subject to those limits should be 
providing catch and effort data.  
63 
 
417. Referring to para 3 and in relation to para 48, FFA members supported the view that all 
catches of tropical tuna, whether target or bycatch, and regardless of the fishing method, 
should be reported. FFA members sought the Commission’s endorsement of this. 
418. One CCM stated that based on its own reading of the text it relates to the targeting of 
tropical tuna, and bycatch data was not required. Japan supported this and observed that 
assessments of compliance should be based on requirements as clearly written. It was 
observed that this data was of scientific importance. 
419. SPC offered advice to assist discussions about what species might be provided in these data. 
It was important to consider bycatch species even when analyzing tropical tuna data, as 
differential targeting was taken into account. Without the species catches in the data it is 
difficult to do that. The Chair observed that if the Commission wants SPC to provide the 
best stock assessments, CCMs as a group had to give them the best data possible.  
420. One CCM recognized the importance of data for scientific work but concurred that this was 
about compliance. According to the context of the measure, it was made very clear in para 
47 and 48 that the focus was on commercial tuna fishing. Those data from tuna fisheries 
should be provided to the Commission. This CCM stated that it has provided as much 
bycatch data to SPC and the Commission as is available. 
iv. 
TCC10 recommends that WCPFC11 provide advice to CCMs on interpretation of 
paragraph 8 of CMM 2009-03 (para 64(v)).  
421. The TCC Chair noted that this recommendation relates to issues of interpretation around 
whether the reporting requirement applies to target fisheries, bycatch fisheries or both, and 
has been a repeat issue for TCC. The TCC Vice-Chair supplemented that this stems from 
the provisional CMR and relates to whether the requirement is for CCMs to report all 
swordfish catches (targeted catches and bycatch) by their vessels in the applicable area, or 
if CCMs only report catches of their vessels targeting swordfish.  
422. The Chair noted that para 8 of the measure states: “CCMs shall report to the Commission 
the total number of vessels that fished for swordfish and the total catch of swordfish”. 
423. One CCM stated that in their view the measure’s purpose is to regulate the targeted fishing 
for swordfish, and only catches of vessels targeting swordfish should be reported. 
424. Some other CCMs stated the opposite view, and noted that para 8 talks about both “the 
number of vessels that fish for swordfish” (referring to the number of vessels targeting 
swordfish) with the second part requiring that CCMs report “the total catch of swordfish.” 
The latter part is not limited to just the vessels, and so the total catch of swordfish should 
be comprised of both target and bycatch fisheries. These CCMs confirmed their 
understanding that CCMs whose vessels have caught swordfish in the area south of 20˚S 
and who have provided a report of total catches by their vessels, both targeted or bycatches, 
should be assessed as compliant with the reporting obligation in CMM 2009-03 para 8.  
425. The CCM that had initially expressed a contrary view, confirmed that it can go along with 
this interpretation, and acknowledged that the second sentence creates an obligation for 
CCMs to report both targeted and bycatch catches of swordfish.  
426. The Interim-Executive Director and Compliance Manager asked the Commission to note 
that this is a reporting obligation for CCMs to provide certain information in their Part 1 
64 
 
Annual Reports and asked the Commission to confirm that the information in para 8 of 
CMM 2009-03 should be included by CCMs in that report next year. It was broadly 
understood among CCMs that they would do so. 
427. The Chair closed discussion on this series of recommendations, noting that there was 
now a common understanding of the reporting obligation as contained in CMM 2009-
03 paragraph 8.   
428. The Chair asked the small working group led by the TCC Vice-Chair to come back to 
plenary with recommendations on ways forward for the first three matters discussed here 
(CMM 2012-01 paragraph 10; CMM 2012-01 paragraph 30 and Scientific Data to be 
Provided paragraph 3).  
Process-Related or Administrative Recommendations for the Compliance Monitoring Scheme 
process.  
429. The TCC Chair noted that these recommendations were for the Commission to agree on 
maintaining certain processes that TCC has adopted in compiling the provisional CMR.  
430. Taking into consideration the CMS process-related recommendations from TCC10, 
WCPFC11 agreed the following: 
i. 
WCPFC11 noted that TCC10, as with TCC9, found conducting the review on an 
obligation by obligation basis both useful and informative. WCPFC11 agreed that 
improvements to this process should continue to be made, taking into account the 
recommendations of the 2014 Final CMR report (para 56).  
ii. 
WCPFC11 noted there were difficulties experienced at TCC in the interpretation of some 
CMMs, WCPFC11 agreed that all new CMMs should be drafted with clear criteria 
as to the nature of the obligation and how compliance with that obligation will be 
assessed (para 57). 
iii. 
WCPFC11 agreed that CCMs will confirm if they have nothing to report on 
obligations when completing Annual Reports to make it clear to the Secretariat that 
this obligation has been considered (para 59).  
iv. 
Noting that a number of CNMs have high levels of non-compliance, WCPFC11 agreed 
to consider the compliance status of CNMs in the granting of CNM status and their 
participatory rights for 2015 (para 60).  
v. 
Noting that TCC10 advised that CCMs consider that exceeding catch and effort limits 
and non-provision of Annual Reports are priority issues for the Commission to consider 
in the CMR, WCPFC11 agreed that in future reviews, non-compliance with these 
obligations should be assessed as “priority non-compliant” (para 61). 
vi. 
WCPFC11 agreed that in future reviews where there are technological constraints 
in implementing a measure, an assessment of “non-compliant” is appropriate (para 
62).  
vii. 
WCPFC11 agreed to prioritize the obligations that will be assessed (para 63). 
431. Noting that the Commission had agreed to prioritize the obligations that will be assessed by 
CMR, the TCC Chair advised that the Commission should also discuss priorities for 
TCC11. 
65 
 
432. USA noted that in the draft CMM on the CMS, proposed language is that each year the 
Commission may add or subtract measures from para 3,  giving the Commission the 
opportunity but not the obligation to choose. 
433. The Chair suggested that instead of undertaking the exercise of prioritizing what CMM 
obligations will be assessed next year, the Commission could deal with them in the draft 
measure and if the measure is then adopted the Commission could do this next year. 
During WCPFC11, a list of obligations to be assessed was finalised and agreed. WCPFC11 
also considered a number of other CMS process-related recommendations, see Agenda 
item 10.9.1 and 10.9.2.  
434. The TCC Chair stressed the need to make changes to the CMS. Noting that TCC has trialed 
different processes and also had some substantial outcomes, there is frustration about 
whether these processes are getting the Commission closer to a scheme which would be 
more helpful to its work and realize the objectives of the scheme. The TCC Chair thanked 
New Zealand and RMI for leading the CMS small working group, noting that issues of 
interpretation also took up a lot of time. The TCC Chair made the observation that TCC 
couldn’t repeat the volume of this year’s work next year, a volume which has doubled if 
not tripled. The Secretariat has successfully put a system in place to collate the large 
volume of information and help the committee get through it. Notwithstanding that, the 
process took too long. The TCC Chair urged the Commission to take up these issues, which 
will assist the TCC’s work in future years. 
435. The WCPFC Chair noted that he was impressed with the amount of work completed. He 
observed that if so much time and energy is going to be committed, the Commission needs 
to make sure it is deriving significant benefit from the process. 
Provisional CMR and Executive Summary 
436. The TCC Vice-Chair, Alexa Cole (USA), presented the Provisional CMR and Executive 
Summary, reporting that the CMS-SWG working group had met in two sessions to assess 
the extra information which had been provided by CCMs after TCC10. Finalisation of the 
CMR was pending decisions on the outstanding substantive recommendations from TCC10 
related to matters of interpretation of certain CMMs and decisions, which had not yet come 
back to plenary, including the operational data CMM. Resolution of those issues may 
require compliance status changes. 
437. After consultations during WCPFC11, the TCC Vice-Chair reported that a draft of the final 
Compliance Monitoring Report (final CMR) was completed and the SWG-CMS was 
working to update the matrix and associated tables to reflect the outcomes, and an 
executive summary. 
438. Referring to the final CMR and noting paragraph 3, New Zealand congratulated Niue, 
Tokelau, Nauru and Tonga for achieving ‘compliant’ status, making the point that these are 
some of WCPFC’s smallest members. 
439. Noting the large number of non-compliant countries in the Final CMR, Japan requested the 
TCC Vice-Chair to explain to the Commission how the SWG-CMS approached the review 
of non-compliance statuses for CCMs who were not able to attend the SWG.  
66 
 
440. The Chair observed that the CMR process can help the Commission find out if it has 
adopted measures that are practically impossible to comply with, or if there are certain 
parts of them that are practically impossible, but could be fixed. 
441. On 5 December, the TCC Vice-Chair introduced section B of WCPFC11-2014-31, which 
considered the three outstanding substantive recommendations from TCC10 related to 
matters of interpretation of certain CMMs and decisions. This document contained draft 
recommendation text for the Commission to consider, including with suggestions of how 
TCC11 might approach these matters during 2015.  
a. CMM 2012-01, Tropical Tuna measure, Para 10 – FADs:  There were questions 
as to if and when a CCM would be considered compliant if there were allegations of 
violations by its vessels. The SWG did not have time to fully address this, but there is 
proposed language in the draft CMM on the Compliance Monitoring Scheme on this 
language that seemed to have general support. 
The SWG recommended that “when there are alleged violations by a CCM’s vessels, 
the CCM will be deemed compliant, for the purposes of the Compliance Monitoring 
Report, when any alleged violations have been fully investigated and/or resolved [as 
much as practically possible] by charging or other appropriate resolution.” 
442. The CMS SWG Chair confirmed that the SWG’s recommendation intends to reflect how 
TCC addressed it this year, which was that CCMs were non-complaint until they had fully 
investigated the matter, which included receiving the observer report. This year, all CCMs 
that had investigations pending were deemed non-compliant, and this reflects the proposed 
language in Annex 1 of the revised measure. The CMS SWG Chair noted that the SWG 
seemed to reach agreement that members would be deemed compliant once they have 
completed that investigation, including receiving the observer report, and taken action. 
443. There was a lively discussion about the considerations that should occur before a CCM is 
assessed by TCC as compliant or non-compliant. Some CCMs noted their view that a 
compliant rating can be given where a CCM says it has made best efforts to investigate 
with the limited information available. EU noted its disagreement with this interpretation, 
with the CCM still considering it an infraction, viewing as a separate issue the CCM taking 
steps. One CCM expressed the view that other rules are needed to decide whether alleged 
violations have been fully investigated. 
444. One CCM noted that its recollection of the SWG’s discussion was that it was based on 
TCC: where there was an ongoing investigation, the status would be assessed non-
compliant. This issue was resolved, and any wording would have to be to the satisfaction of 
the TCC. 
445. One CCM supported Japan’s proposal, referring to Convention Articles 20 and 25(2) and 
noting that within two months the investigation should be finished but charging would take 
longer. This CCM expressed the view that this needs to be practical. If, in the beginning of 
September, a CCM receives some evidence, with TCC starting at the end of September 
there wouldn’t be time to finish the investigation, let alone charge, so in that particular year 
that country would be non-compliant. The Commission should avoid such a situation. 
446. The Chair noted that there are some parts of the new measure on which it is going to be 
difficult to reach resolution. He suggested that the group could consider reaching an 
67 
 
agreement that we weren’t able to resolve these issues at this meeting and task the TCC 
Chair, Vice-Chair and Secretariat to improve the process in 2015. 
447. The TCC Vice-Chair noted the pending compliance assessments, so the group only has the 
choices of “compliant”, “non-compliant”, or “not assessed” and cautioned that without a 
resolution, TCC will be bogged down next year. The TCC Vice-Chair urged a decision to 
be taken at least for the year going forward, in order to adopt the report at WCPFC11. The 
Chair asked the Commission to consider a decision that could assist the TCC during 2015, 
pending a longer-term resolution.  
448. Several CCMs could not support this approach regardless of what had happened at TCC: 
One CCM stated that compliant or non-compliant is not clear, and judging from the legal 
process, in its case it was not non-compliant. Japan did not support it and stated that 
alleged non-compliance is equal to compliance under its legal system. Japan said the 
consequence of accepting this approach would be that at the next annual meeting the 
Commission will take action against it. Another noted that it was very important to receive 
complete reports from relevant coastal states. 
449. One CCM clarified an earlier intervention, with the delegate explaining that he was not 
speaking to overall compliance scores but about TCC’s approach, which was to assess all 
of these obligations at that time. The working group’s conclusion was based on the factual 
approach that TCC took on this issue. Mindful of the time and the press of other business, 
one CCM suggested a temporary solution to assess the CCMs implicated here as ‘not able 
to be assessed’ and drop the recommendation for now and seek a compromise. 
450. The Chair repeated his suggestion that the Commission agree that it could not agree and 
ask the TCC Chair, Vice-Chair and Secretariat to work on the issue in consultation with 
CCMs for a way forward. Some CCMs disagreed and stated that they were seeking a 
change in score from non-compliant to compliant.  
451. Another CCM preferred to resolve the issue at this meeting and stated that fishing on FADs 
during closures is one of the main implementation issues in CMM 2013-01 and there is 
danger in a CCM not being assessed because the group cannot agree on an interpretation. 
In this CCM’s view it was fair to continue in the way decided at TCC10. If a CCM has not 
taken action where it would have been appropriate, it would be fair to consider the member 
non-compliant. This CCM expressed concern that the work of TCC could be endangered. 
452. WCPFC11 agreed to not agree on those specific obligations, but continued to finalise the 
Final CMR report. 
b. CMM 2012-01, Tropical Tuna measure, Para 30: TCC10 recommended that 
WCPFC11 discuss the interpretation of paragraph 48 of CMM 2013-01 with respect 
to the obligation to provide the necessary catch and effort data and how these 
obligations should be assessed at TCC11 for compliance. 
c. Scientific data, paragraph 3: TCC10 recommended that WCPFC11 should discuss 
the different in interpretation of this paragraph as a priority matter  
The SWG did not have a recommendation – this needs further discussion. 
453. The TCC Vice-Chair noted that the SWG could not agree on recommendations for b) and 
c) and explained that there was no final assessment or agreed language for these. 
68 
 
454. The TCC Vice-Chair noted that the next SWG recommendation was agreed language at 
CMS-SWG at TCC, and across the floor at TCC10, and so should be non-controversial.  
The provisional Compliance Monitoring Report also included several agreed 
decisions from TCC10 on interpretation of measures that CCMs agreed would 
govern our future assessments: 
a. CMM 2007-01: Att K, Annex C, para 04, Regional Observer Programme 
 
 
-TCC agreed that it will assess presence and absence of data 
b. CMM 2009-06 Para 11: Annex 2, Transshipment reporting 
-TCC agreed that when preparing Part 1 Annual Reports, CCMs will 
provide all required fields to the Secretariat for assessment. CCMs are 
non-compliant until satisfactory information is received. 
c. CMM 2009-06 Para 35a(iv), Transshipment 
-TCC agreed that it would continue to assess this obligation as it did at 
TCC10. 
d. CMM 2005-03 Para 2: North Pacific Albacore 
-TCC agreed that it would continue to assess this obligation as it did at 
TCC10]. 
e. CMM 2011-03 Para 5, Cetaceans 
-TCC agreed to include Para 2b in this assessment to ensure the reports 
in paragraph 5 reflect what is required in paragraph 2b. 
SWG recommendation:  WCPFC11 agrees that that the decisions of TCC10 in its 
Appendix 1 of preliminary Compliance Monitoring Report, detailed above, will apply 
to future compliance assessments on the obligations as specified 
455. A few CCMs noted that they objected to some of these TCC10 recommendations. Japan 
pointed out that these decisions were made for TCC11 assessment, thus could not support 
SWG recommendation that these decision will apply to future compliance assessment. The 
Chair noted that the CMS SWG Chair had advised that some agreements were reached this 
year at TCC10 and if the Commission does not agree the same issues will arise next year.  
456. Other CCMs expressed surprise at hearing these views now, recalling the agreements and 
proposed ways forward at the CMS SWG. One delegation invited other delegations to have 
a constructive attitude to these negotiations and noted it was a big task to move forward 
and streamline the TCC, and not repeat discussions. Another CCM observed that there was 
a difference between reserving a compliance score and unravelling TCC’s work. This CCM 
recognized that a very large body of work went into this years’ CMR and expressed the 
view that the intervention had effectively rendered that work redundant. 
457. In response, one CCM asked for clarification about not being able to overturn a TCC 
recommendation, 
asking 
if 
the 
Commission 
just 
endorses 
subsidiary 
body 
recommendation’s then in this CCM’s view we should not talk about these issues at all. 
The Commission has a right to overturn TCC decisions, although it should do that only 
when there is a demonstrated good cause for doing so, for the overall benefit of what the 
Commission is trying to accomplish. Another CCM noted that it was not here to undermine 
anything, but must protect itself, and suggested that TCC discuss it again next year.  
458. Australia noted that the CMS process was an important aspect of the work of the 
Commission and encouraged members to retain the integrity of the CMS process. 
69 
 
459. The Chair observed that there was no consensus on this proposed recommendation from 
TCC10. 
Adoption of Final CMR covering 2013 activities  
460. In response to a request for confirmation that the status for CCMs who cannot attend the 
SWG stays non-compliant, even though they have submitted more information, TCC Vice-
Chair noted that as agreed at TCC10, and as had been mentioned in the executive 
summary, the SWG did not review the statuses for CCMs which did not attend the SWG 
meeting. The statuses of CCMs that were not in attendance did not change. 
461. The concerned CCM explained that its delegation has a limited number of English 
speakers. The proceedings move fast and the language barrier appears to be disregarded. 
462. One CCM observed that the first discussion of this issue was being made across the floor. 
This CCM noted that if there was a concern, there were opportunities for it to be raised, 
and the SWG could have addressed it at the time. 
463. One CCM noted that its delegation, too, has very few people who speak English. This 
CCM concentrated on the tropical tuna SWG and no member of its delegation could go to 
the SWG on compliance. While it tried to get the information subsequently, no one had 
informed them of the result. This CCM noted that it may still be assessed non-compliant. 
464. Speaking as FFC Chair, Tokelau noted that the majority of FFA members are non-English 
speaking and they often find it hard to manage the Commission business. These members 
consider the language barrier and the small size of their delegations a disproportionate 
burden, but considered it was unfair to open up the TCC recommendations on these 
grounds. 
465. The Chair asked CCMs to ensure they are communicating with each other well before 
TCC, to make sure concerns are known so the Commission can address them. 
466. Noting that the draft recommendations in section B of WCPFC11-2014-31 were not 
agreed, WCPFC11 directed the TCC Vice-Chair and Secretariat to update the Final 
Compliance Monitoring Report, including the matrix and table of compliance statuses to 
reflect that CMM 2012-01 paragraph 10; CMM 2012-01 paragraph 30 and Scientific Data 
to be Provided paragraph 3 were “not assessed” in this year’s CMR.  
467. WCPFC11 agreed to adopt the Final Compliance Monitoring Report for 2013 
comprised of an Executive Summary, a matrix and a table of compliance statuses 
(Attachment H).  
468. WCPFC11 agreed to ask TCC to address some CCM’s concerns regarding the CMS 
process.  
9.1.2 
Adoption of the WCPFC IUU Vessel List for 2015 
469. TCC10 recommended to the Commission that the existing WCPFC IUU Vessel List 
remain unchanged (para 18). 
70 
 
470. FFA members supported TCC10’s recommendation, noting that these vessels have been 
listed for 4-5 years and requesting that all CCMs cooperate so WCPFC can follow their 
activities and track any name, flag or ownership changes. For vessels not flagged to a 
CCM, FFA members requested CCMs use diplomatic channels to seek updates and action 
from the flag States of listed vessels. These CCMs requested that when the WCPFC 
Secretariat advises other organizations of the WCPFC IUU Vessel List, it seeks their 
cooperation to stay alert for the listed vessels through registration processes and networks. 
471. WCPFC11 adopted an unchanged WCPFC IUU Vessel List for 2015. (Attachment I) 
9.1.3 
Recommendations and advice  
Data provision and gaps 
472. Dr John Hampton (SPC-OFP) presented WCPFC11-2014-19b, in which a proposed tiered 
scoring system for evaluating compliance with the provision of scientific data to the 
Commission was outlined. TCC10 had requested SPC develop such a system, to reflect the 
magnitude of implications of data gaps and report back to WCPFC11 (para 256). There are 
two aspects of data provision that should be considered: (i) the completeness of the data 
fields provided; and (ii) the level of coverage achieved by the data provision. Minimum 
standards for both data fields and coverage are specified in Scientific Data to be provided 
to the Commission and the WCPFC Regional Observer Programme Minimum Data 
Standards. There are three categories of compliance that are commonly observed for 
provision of scientific data: (i) that the data are not provided at all; (ii) that data are 
provided but are incomplete either because not all data fields have been provided or that 
minimum coverage levels have not been met; and (iii) that complete data have been 
provided at or above the minimum level of coverage. For category (ii), it was 
recommended that a compliance score be computed based on a multiplication of the 
percentage of the data fields provided and the percentage of the minimum coverage level 
achieved. It was not felt appropriate to give greater importance to some data fields over 
others – they are all required and important, and it was recommended that they be treated 
equally in the compliance scoring system. 
473. Several CCMs thanked SPC for developing the scoring system and expressed support for 
the recommendations in the paper.  
474. Japan expressed general support for the idea of a scoring system noting that there are many 
data gaps to be addressed. On the other hand, Japan stated that the proposed application of 
this scoring system should be applied to compliance issues. In this point, Japan reminded 
the Commission that Section 3 of the Scientific Data to be Provided to the Commission 
stipulates that if there are domestic legal constraints, aggregated data shall be provided 
until such constraints are overcome, and thus CCMs should be regarded as being in full 
compliance on the requirement if required aggregated data was provided. 
475. The Chair suggested that before the requirements to which this will apply are determined, 
the Commission needed to work through the FFA-proposed CMM on provision of catch 
and effort data and confirmed that the system as described in the paper would only apply to 
the data fields that are required to be provided to the Commission. 
71 
 
476. EU suggested the Commission tries and integrates it into the revised CMS, and noted that 
new ideas on how to further refine the scoring system may be presented in the future and 
should be able to be taken into account. The EU considered the system a work in progress.  
477. Other CCMs stated a preference that the proposal should be run through SC11 before 
TCC11. 
478. WCPFC11 adopted the tier scoring system for evaluating compliance with the 
provision of scientific data to the Commission, on the understanding that TCC will 
keep looking at the process of refining the CMR. The tiered scoring system would be 
sent to the SC for its consideration. (Attachment J) 
VMS 
479. WCPFC11 accepted the recommendation from TCC10 (para 102) and extended the 
VMS manual position reporting requirements (the WCPFC9 agreed amendments to 
the VMS SSPs Section 5) until 1 March 2017. (Attachment K) 
ROP  
480. The TCC Chair referred the Commission to WCPFC11-2014-IP03, particularly the tables 
at the front of the paper, and noted that there were a number of TCC recommendations 
under this agenda item.   
IMO number as minimum data standard observer is to collect: 
481. WCPFC11 agreed that the data field International Maritime Organisation (IMO) 
number or Lloyd’s Register number required as per CMM 2013-04 is added to the 
list of minimum standard data fields an observer is asked to collect from vessels that 
are more than 100 GT or GRT (para 114). 
Guidelines for ROP Identification Cards: 
482. WCPFC11 adopted as guidelines the following list of information for ROP 
Identification Cards (para 119):  
Suggested minimum required information on the front of each card: 
1) 
Name of the observer 
2) 
Name of the observer provider 
3) 
Nationality of the observer 
4) 
Unique identifying number for the observer 
5) 
Passport style photo of the observer 
Information that could be placed on either the front or back of the card: 
6) 
Issue date and Expiry date  
7) 
WCPFC logo to indicate observer is ROP observer 
8) 
Logo of Programme and or Country Flag 
Optional information that could be included on the back of the card: 
9) 
Signature of Observer; 
10) 
Status of observer Qualifications. 
 
 
 
 
72 
 
Measuring and Monitoring ROP longline coverage: 
483. WCPFC11 approved the guidelines for ROP longline coverage by fleet/fishery 
described in Attachment L Table 1, noting that it should be open to review and 
adjustments at future TCC meetings. 
484. WCPFC11 agreed that CCMs shall: 
a. Decide on the observer coverage metric and then compile the observer coverage 
using this metric for their fleet activity in 2013 (as required in Attachment L Tables 2 
and 3) and submit this information to the WCPFC Secretariat before 28 February 
2015. A sample report format is provided as guidance to assist CCMs with reporting 
(Attachment L Table 4) 
b. (for subsequent years) Compile and include this information in their respective 
Annual Report Part 1 to be submitted from 2015 onwards, noting that revisions can 
be provided at the annual TCC meeting. 
485. WCPFC11 tasked the WCPFC Science/Data service provider with compiling 
estimates of total activity of each fleet for the nominated metric (outlined by the SC10 
ISG7) to be included in the template (Attachment L Table 3)  
a. For 2013 activities, this information should be combined in the template 
(Attachment L Table 3) with the observer coverage provided by the CCMs (deadline 
28th February 2015) and made available by 30th March 2015. 
b. For subsequent years, this information should be combined in the template 
(Attachment L Table 3) with the observer coverage provided by the CCMs (in their 
Part 1 reports) and made available for SC and TCC 
486. WCPFC11 tasked the WCPFC Secretariat (with assistance from the Science/Data 
service provider) with compiling the information reported by CCMs on longline 
observer coverage and reporting the information included in Attachment L Tables 2 
and 3 in papers tabled for future SC and TCC meetings. 
Guideline timeframes to submit ROP data for high seas transshipment monitoring:  
487. WCPFC11 agreed that ROP providers which place observers on fish carrier vessels 
that transship on the high seas are strongly encouraged to send the completed data 
forms, workbooks, reports and journals of the observer to the Commission 
Secretariat where possible within 120 days of the disembarkation of the observer 
from the carrier (para 156). 
CMM Booklet (ROP specific) to be prepared by Secretariat: 
488. WCPFC11 agreed to task the Secretariat to produce a ROP observer-specific CMM 
booklet commencing in 2015, to be updated on a yearly basis. Based on requests from 
ROP authorized observer programmes, the Secretariat should arrange for the 
printing and distribution of the ROP focused Observer CMM booklet. An electronic 
version of the observer-specific CMM booklet and a booklet containing a complete set 
of current CMMs should also be made available on the WCPFC public website for 
download (para 164). 
 
73 
 
Matters to be forwarded to IWG-ROP: 
489. WCPFC11 agreed that the following matters identified by TCC10 should be 
forwarded to the IWG-ROP:  
i. 
Discuss the suggested mechanisms to Prevent and Deter Alcohol-Related 
Misconduct of Observers (para 149) (Attachment M). 
ii. 
Further discuss and provide direction on the following proposed transshipment 
notification rules for all fish carriers (para 157): 
  
a) 24 hrs prior to entry of the vessel into the WCPFC Convention area 
must inform the Commission Secretariat on their intentions to either 
tranship at sea, tranship in a designated port, or tranship both in port 
and on the high seas; 
b) 24 hrs prior to departing a port in the WCPFC Convention area 
must inform the Commission Secretariat on their intentions to tranship 
at sea or tranship in a designated port or tranship both in port and on 
the high seas;  
c) on completion of their transhipping activities at sea or in port in the 
WCPFC Convention Area must inform the WCPFC Secretariat within 
24hrs of their destination port; and 
d) intending to tranship at sea on entry into the Convention area, or 
departing from a port in the Convention area, will notify to the 
Commission Secretariat the name of the ROP certified observer 
onboard. 
Note that the above proposed transshipment notification reporting to the 
Commission Secretariat is not intended to negate any current zone or 
port entry or exit procedures.   
iii. 
Discuss and provide guidance to WCPFC12 on the definition of the 
responsibilities of the flag states in respect of obligation CMM 2007-01 
Attachment K Annex C paragraph 4 (para 64(ii)). 
iv. 
The matter of interpretation of CMM 2007-01 paragraph 9 to the IWG-ROP 
(para 64(vi)).  
490. TCC10 had recommended that the IWG-ROP should “encourage discussion to develop 
processes to facilitate the provision of data, including observer reports, from the observer 
providers and placement information from Flag States to the Commission (para 64(i)).”  
491. In relation to this TCC10 recommendation, FFA members noted that they have submitted a 
proposal to deal with the provision of data, including observer reports, from the observer 
providers and placement information from Flag States to the Commission in a definitive 
manner and referred delegates to WCPFC11-2014-DP07.  
492. The Chair suspended discussion on this TCC10 recommendation pending the results of the 
consideration of the proposed amendment to CMM 2007-01 under agenda 10.7. The Chair 
noted in the event that the proposed CMM is not adopted, the TCC10 recommendation 
(para 64(i)) could also be forwarded to the IWG-ROP for discussion.  
74 
 
493. Noting that WCPFC11-2014-DP07 was not agreed, WCPFC11 agreed that the IWG-
ROP should also encourage discussion to develop processes to facilitate the provision 
of data, including observer reports, from the observer providers and placement 
information from Flag States to the Commission (para 64(i)). 
Transshipment 
494. The TCC Chair noted there were no substantive recommendations to WCFPC11 from 
TCC10 related to transshipment. Two TCC10 recommendations set out in para 190 and 
191 were noted.  
HSBI 
495. The TCC Chair noted there were no substantive recommendations for WCFPC11 from 
TCC10 relating to the HSBI scheme. One TCC10 recommendation set out in para 200 was 
noted. 
496. Japan made a general comment about HSBI Firstly, Japan reported that there have been 
some cases where boarding and inspection activities were conducted without notification 
although paragraph 20(d) of CMM 2006-08 calls for the inspecting side to give prior 
notification to flag States. Secondly, Japan explained that in some cases its vessels have 
been repored with no active VMS and its investigation identified that the cause was non-
provision of VTAF information to the VMS providers by the Secretariat. Japan requested 
the Secretariat to ensure this information will be provided to the VMS provider.  
497. The Interim-Executive Director responded that the Secretariat has recognised the issue and 
explained that over the last 12 months the Secretariat has undertaken a significant amount 
of work to align the VMS database with the RFV, and had a thorough review of the vessel 
tracking database. The Secretariat will be contacting some CCMs in the coming year to 
resolve gaps and improvements can be expected in 2015. 
498. The Chair expressed the hope that the appropriate HSBI notifications are being made and 
asked CCMs to be mindful of the requirement. 
499. FFA members supported the TCC10 recommendation in paragraph 200 of TCC10 report 
for the Secretariat continuing to work on mechanisms to ensure updated contact details for 
authorities of fishing vessels as well as authorities of inspection vessels. 
RFV 
500. WCPFC11 accepted the TCC10 recommendation (para 217), and agreed that 
information reported by flag CCMs as part of Record of Fishing Vessels updates, 
related to charter notifications and high seas transshipment authorizations should be 
treated as public domain data. 
EHSP 
501. WCPFC11 accepted the TCC10 recommendations (paras 228 and 234), and agreed: 
i) to the development of clearer and consistent specifications to address the issues 
relating to the reporting of data in this and similar CMMs;  
75 
 
ii) to task the Secretariat to work with interested CCMs on some joint initiatives that 
CCMs might use on a voluntary basis, with a view to streamlining the WCPFC data 
entry processes for EHSP-SMA reporting; and  
iii) to amend CMM 2010-02 paragraph 2 to add vessel name to reporting 
requirements.1  
Swordfish 
502. TCC10 recommended to WCPFC11 that the Secretariat be tasked to complete two 
outstanding tasks in the TCC9 recommendations and to present additional information to 
SC11. (para 303).  
503. The EU asked to revisit wording relating to the words “identify mitigation measures to help 
address and avoid overfishing”, opining that this implied overfishing in the western Pacific 
is occurring, when SC has confirmed that overfishing is not occurring. The EU noted that 
overfishing might be happening in the eastern Pacific Ocean but not in the WCPO, where 
the stock is healthy.  
504. Japan asked SPC for its scientific view on whether swordfish in the Pacific Ocean is a 
single stock, and expressed concern that the EU’s intervention might weaken the 
recommendation if it was a single stock, which would not be good for the Commission.  
505. Dr Harley (SPC-OFP) noted that the SC could not come to a conclusion on the status of the 
swordfish stock but provided a recommendation related to fishing mortality (that there 
should be no increase). In response to a question, SPC also clarified there is one stock 
which covers the eastern Pacific Ocean and another in the western and central area; there is 
mixing in the central area. The current understanding is that there are three stocks in the 
Pacific. 
506. The Chair stated that the amended wording did not weaken the measure but clarifies that 
there is no overfishing occurring and the hope to avoid it in the future. The EU confirmed 
that the suggested wording was not intended to weaken the recommendation language; 
“may it occur” was preferred for the sake of preciseness. 
 
                                                      
 
1 Secretariat note: At WCPFC11 the Commission did not specify the exact amendment that should be 
made to the EHSP entry and exit report format as prescribed in paragraph 2 of CMM 2010-02.  In the 
absence of clear direction from the Commission, and in response to two comments received on the draft 
WCPFC11 summary report, the Secretariat provides the following guidance to CCMs to consider in their 
implementation of the WCPFC11 decision:   
 
Flag CCMs should instruct their vessels to include the “Vessel name” (exactly as it is written in the Record 
of Fishing Vessels), at the end of specified reporting format prescribed in paragraph 2 of CMM 2010-02:   
VID/Entry/Exit: Date/Time1; Lat/Long1; YFT/BET/ALB/SKJ/SWO/SHK/OTH/TOT(kgs) 
/TRANSHIPMENT (Y/N) /VESSEL NAME2  
 
1 Of anticipated point of entry or exit. 
2 Exactly as it written in the Record of Fishing Vessels. 
76 
 
507. WCPFC11 tasked the Secretariat to complete two outstanding tasks in the TCC9 
recommendations and to present additional information to SC11. These were: (i) 
distribution of swordfish catches between EEZs and high seas, to the extent possible, 
and (ii) identify mitigation measures to help address and avoid overfishing, may it 
occur.  
9.2 
E-monitoring and E-reporting initiatives 
508. The E-Monitoring and E-Reporting Workshop (EmandErW) was held in Honiara, Solomon 
Islands, from 31 March-1 April 2014, chaired by Ray Clarke (USA). TCC10 subsequently 
received the EmandErW Chair’s Report of the workshop, updates from CCMs and a paper 
from the Secretariat on proposed next steps for the development of draft electronic 
standards.  
509. The Interim-Executive Director noted that the Secretariat had prepared for consideration by 
CCMs a draft TOR for an EmandEr working group (WCPFC11-2014-20). During the 
meeting a revised TOR was circulated (WCPFC11-2014-20_rev1), which took into account 
comments received from CCMs during WCPFC11. The proposal to establish an ErandEm 
working group had come about as a recommendation from TCC and SC that, recognising 
that a number of CCMs are already using or are soon to commence using E-reporting 
systems as part of their fisheries monitoring and information management systems, and if 
the Commission failed to agree on standards for electronic data the Secretariat may be left 
behind. Agreeing a TOR would be a step in developing the electronic reporting standards 
which will take into account the current and developing fisheries monitoring and 
information management systems in use by members, and provide a basis for the 
Secretariat’s preparations to be ready to receive electronic forms of fisheries data and 
reporting.  
510. Several CCMs supported the establishment of a working group and the draft TOR.  
511. Australia nominated Kerry Smith (Australia) to progress the group’s work, which several 
CCMs supported, noting her excellent work in the previous year. 
512. It was particularly important for the EU that WCPFC does not reinvent the wheel. This 
CCM noted there is a lot of work going on in other RFMOs and internationally and 
whatever systems WCPFC considers they need to be able to talk to one another.  
513. One CCM commented that to reduce trial and error it would be beneficial to seek views 
from experts, including port coordinators, as they will collect and monitor certain 
information in major Convention area ports. This could be closely related to E-reporting. 
This CCM proposed the insertion of ‘port coordinators’ in para 5.  
514. Japan queried whether port coordinators should be added to para 5 as the port coordinator 
proposal was still under discussion, and asked to keep it blank until the proposal is adopted. 
The Chair noted that port coordinators were already in place in the region and the 
Commission should take advantage of their expertise, to which Japan agreed. 
515. WCPFC11 agreed to form an ErandEm working group, with terms of reference set 
out in Attachment N. WCPFC11 elected Kerry Smith (Australia) to be Chair of the 
ErandEm working group. 
77 
 
516. The Interim-Executive Director noted that Kerry Smith was very well suited to progressing 
this important piece of work. The Secretariat noted that there is a budgetary implication to 
the proposal, and that there was currently a line item in the draft budget for the work. 
9.3 
CDS-IWG Report 
517. WCPFC9 established the Catch Documentation Scheme Intersessional Working Group 
(CDS-IWG), and appointed Mr Alois Kinol (PNG) as Chair. A Workplan for the CDS-
IWG was approved at WCPFC10. The CDS-IWG met on 24 September 2014 and the CDS-
IWG Chair reported to TCC10 (WCPFC11-2014-IP05). TCC10 endorsed the CDS-IWG 
Workplan for 2015 and recommended it to the Commission (para 280). 
518. FFA members thanked the IWG Chair for the IWG meeting reports and noted the range of 
views held by CCMs, which meant high level discussions took place but not the detail of a 
CDS framework. Despite this, these CCMs took the view that the discussions at the second 
IWG meeting moved the Commission further than any previous attempt. FFA members 
have commenced preparations for the next IWG meeting and referred CCMs to the FFA 
paper submitted prior to the second IWG meeting (WCPFC-2014-CDSIWG-DP01). These 
CCMs supported the proposed Workplan and expressed the view that this process would 
deliver a framework for the development of specific systems which could meet the national 
and sub-regional requirements of CCMs and the regional objectives of a CDS.  
519. The Interim-Executive Director noted that this recommendation has budgetary 
implications, and the Secretariat included the costs of a CDS-IWG workshop in the budget 
proposal for 2015 that is being considered by FAC. 
520. WCPFC11 accepted this recommendation of TCC10, and approved the CDS-IWG 
Workplan for 2015. (Attachment O)  
9.4 
Port Coordinators Proposal 
521. A joint discussion paper between FSM-NORMA/WCPFC was circulated to CCMs 
(Circular 2014/36) and discussed at TCC10. TCC10 requested that the Secretariat and FSM 
further develop the paper, taking into account the discussion at TCC10, and bring a draft 
proposal with TOR to WCPFC11 for further consideration. 
522. The Interim-Executive Director referred delegates to a revised joint proposal between the 
Secretariat and FSM-NORMA which was revised following discussions at TCC10 
(WCPFC11-2014-WP21). In response to a request from some CCMs during TCC10, a 
table has been included on the front page of the proposal which contains available 
information about the volume of transshipment activities that occurs in the five ports which 
are proposed for funding; this is based on information available in Annual Reports Part 1 
and which were confirmed by the relevant CCMs. The proposal is for a port coordinator to 
be funded by the Commission in five fisheries administrations: FSM, Kiribati, RMI, 
Solomon Islands and PNG. It is proposed that each administration could claim up to 
USD15,000 over 2 years and a one-off overhead and equipment costs of up to USD5000. 
The proposal takes into account concerns raised by a number of CCMs during TCC10 
including that ports are areas of sovereignty, and that it was important to allow flexibility 
in how individual agencies take into account their existing staff and needs. The paper 
provides a broad list of potential duties for each Port Coordinator and Heads of fisheries 
agencies are provided flexibility to direct those duties to areas of greatest need. While 
78 
 
funding would come from the Commission, the port coordinator positions, as national staff, 
would be accountable within the usual lines of reporting within their national fisheries 
agency. 
523. FSM noted that SPC was included in the consultation process to ensure it was as 
comprehensive as possible, and explained that some CCMs have been undertaking data 
collection in their ports and making information on transshipments available to SPC. 
WCPFC and SPC have advised that the entirety of this information is not always useful. 
FSM explained that the proposal addresses maintaining activities in ports and expanding to 
meet the needs of WCPFC, and while these CCMs can collect and make the information 
available, but it has to be paid for. FSM explained that some have had to scale back port 
monitoring activities as they were not funded. FSM noted that a 2 year trial is proposed. 
524. The Chair noted that this is a start and the Commission can keep improving the 
programme. 
525. One CCM asked what the linkage is with the FFA port State measures proposal in 
WCPFC11-2014-DP04 and whether the data that was collected by port coordinators under 
the programme would be provided to the Commission.  
526. The Interim-Executive Director responded to confirm that the proposal is for the port 
coordinators to be national staff of the relevant Fisheries Agency or Department. The 
proposal recognizes that a number of Pacific island countries already submit data collected 
from port monitoring activities to SPC, and this data underpins scientific work for the 
Commission; the proposal is intended to provide assistance to Pacific Island countries by 
supporting fisheries data collection procedures that they currently undertake in their ports. 
527. FSM confirmed there is no current linkage between this proposal and the port State 
measures proposal – port coordinators are the starting point for capacity building activities, 
with the Commission playing a role to support SIDS. There are a significant number of 
transshipments. National agencies would collect the data and get it to SPC and make it 
available to WCPFC through the data rules. 
528. Many CCMs supported the proposal, with one asking that the discussion be deferred until 
the port State measures CMM was discussed. Several CCMs supported the trial period.  
529. FFA members explained that the Commission needs to meaningfully address the capacity 
needs of SIDS and support this approach. During discussions in subsidiary meetings, the 
assistance of coastal states is often requested to monitor foreign fleets, in particular 
transhipment and unloading activities. However, resourcing is not forthcoming. FFA 
members supported a 2 year trial period. 
530. While supporting the measure, the EU attention to the issue of data exchange with SPC and 
coordination between observer programs. This CCM saw the proposal as distinct from port 
State measures, with different objectives, noting it would improve understanding about 
transshipments in ports. 
531. Japan generally supported the concept of WCPFC Port Coordinator considering the 
importance of monitoring and data collection of transshipment activities as the 
Commission activities, noting that capacity building in these areas are the main objective 
of the Japan Trust Fund. Considering the positions character was as Commission 
79 
 
coordinators, Japan proposed that its duties should be decided by the Commission in 
consultation with relevant port States. Japan also proposed that the information collected 
should be shared with all Commission members and requested SPC, as a scientific 
provider, to prepare a progress report each year for SC and TCC. As for the future after the 
2 year trial, Japan stated that priority should be placed on possible expansion of monitoring 
ports considering the WCPFC’s limited budget and its maximum utilisation. 
532. One CCM supported the proposal as it seeks to address the capacity needs of SIDS, but 
requested that non-SIDS CCMs consider funding for this work, to avoid adding costs when 
SIDS are trying to address capacity issues. Other CCMs supported deferring discussion of 
the port State measures proposal until after the port coordinators trial period. 
533. Some CCMs stated there was not a link between this proposal and the port State measures 
proposal, or any need to suspend while discussion on the latter is pending. However, one 
CCM added there were very good elements in the port State measures proposal, especially 
the Annex which provides comprehensive guidelines about how port inspections might 
take place. These should be formally adopted by the Commission. 
534. The Chair noted that the port coordinators project focuses on collecting fisheries data. The 
port State measures proposal has many more issues associated with it than simply data 
collection. The Chair reminded CCMs that WCPFC has acknowledged many times the 
need to get as much accurate data as possible, to help the scientists give the best advice. 
535. Some CCMs disagreed, commenting that there should be strong linkages between the two 
proposals. Discussions on this proposal were suspended pending the port State measures 
discussions.  
536. On Friday 5 December, the Chair revisited the port coordinator proposal, noting that 
although discussion had been suspended there was a placeholder in FAC for it. One CCM 
reiterated its view that the port coordinator proposal has linkages with the port State 
measures proposal, and as the port State measures proposal had been withdrawn this CCM 
could not agree with the port coordinator proposal. 
537. The Chair noted that FFA had not withdrawn the proposal, and stressed that port 
coordinators would collect fisheries data, not compliance or other kinds of data.  
538. FSM confirmed that the port State measures proposal was not withdrawn by FFA, it simply 
was not adopted and reiterated that the port coordinator proposal is about data collection. 
FSM commented that SIDS continue to carry the burden of providing data, and considered 
the proposal would go a long way to assisting SIDS not only in meeting their obligations 
but in facilitating the flow of data for stock assessments. These SIDS want to continue 
these activities but there were costs to them, as well as group benefits. FSM saw no linkage 
between data collection by the port coordinators and port State measures. 
539. One CCM noted that it had listened carefully and could now support the proposal.  
540. The EU stated that it did not see the linkage with port State measures. This proposal was 
not about performing inspections; port coordinators would improve data collection. This 
CCM regretted that the Commission could not reach agreement on this proposal just 
because one delegation believes there is a linkage. 
80 
 
541. Japan took the view that the proposal was a comprehensive and appropriate scheme, 
considering the importance of monitoring and data collection of transshipment activities, 
and agreed with the concept that the Commission should work closely in consultation with 
coastal states. Japan stated their view that SPC should provide progress reports of activities 
to SC and TCC in order to facilitate information sharing of the activities among all CCMs. 
542. WCPFC11 agreed: 
a. To establish a trial WCPFC port coordinators programme based on the proposed 
terms of reference (Attachment P). The programme will be implemented on a trial 
basis for two (2) years in 5 ports in the WCPO. The positions would be funded from 
the WCPFC Annual Budget during 2015 and 2016 (based on local salary rates), but 
the positions would operate as an integral part of the National Fisheries 
Agency/Department with reporting through the appropriate line manager in the 
National Fisheries Agency/Department.  
b. That the five ports which would be eligible to receive funding would be Pohnpei, 
(FSM), Majuro (RMI); Tarawa or Christmas Island (Kiribati); Rabual (PNG) and 
Honiara in the Solomon Islands (SI). Each WCPFC Member would be able to submit 
an invoice to WCPFC Secretariat for payment towards their Port Coordinator, which 
is up to USD15,000 per year over a two year period plus $5,000 one off equipment and 
establishment cost.  
c. Relevant Members, SPC-OFP and WCPFC Secretariat will jointly report to SC and 
TCC (in 2015 and 2016), on the implementation of the trial WCPFC port coordinators 
programme.  
d. If after two years the evaluation proves that the program has been successful the 
Commission can then take an informed decision to extend the program to other ports 
in the WCPO, where appropriate. 
9.5 
Proposal to refine CMM 2013-03 – RFV SSPs Proposal (Secretariat)  
543. The Interim-Executive Director briefly introduced WCPFC11-2014-22 and WCPFC11-
2014-22_supplA, noting that WCPFC11-2014-22 Attachment 1 is a proposal to revise the 
CMM 2013-03 on Standards, Specifications and Procedures for the WCPFC Record of 
Fishing Vessels (the RFV SSPs CMM). The Secretariat had provided some suggestions for 
changes in a proposal to TCC10 based on a 4-5 month review of implementation 
challenges CCMs had faced when submitting excel spreadsheet-based data for RFV 
updates. Some key points of the current proposal, which takes on board comments from 
TCC10 include: 
 
updating references to current CMMs; 
 
providing a mechanism for CCMs to submit an IMO or LR number for their vessels 
where it is available. Currently only countries using the online system are able to 
submit these numbers, the proposed amendment will ensure that those CCMs 
submitting updates via an excel document can also add an IMO or LR number, where 
available; 
 
clarifying the use of data action codes; 
 
edits to the ‘vessel type’ list; 
 
using abbreviations or codes for long phrases to reduce errors in submissions of RFV 
updates from CCMs, particularly in submissions via an excel document; 
81 
 
 
a process for using abbreviations in place of full text names for vessels Port of 
Registry. The proposal is for the Secretariat to maintain a living list of port codes; 
any time a CCM wants to include a new port code this can be added to the list within 
2 days;  
 
in response to a concern raised at TCC10, a 6 month delay in implementation is 
proposed, with the amended RFV SSPs applying from June 2015. 
 
544. Japan confirmed its support for the proposal on the condition that there is a 6 month delay 
for implementation following the adoption of the amendments. Japan expressed thanks to 
the Secretariat for taking their concern into account in the revised proposal.   
545. The Interim-Executive Director noted two matters the Secretariat had not been able to take 
up in this proposal and referred delegates to page 3 of WCPFC11-2014-22: a) One CCM 
had requested a two letter country code change; and b) there was a proposal to include a 
deadline for CCMs to provide minimum data fields for all vessels that were on the RFV 
prior to June 2014.  
546. Several CCMs supported the proposal (WCPFC11-2014-22 Attachment 1), with some 
thanking the Secretariat for reflecting their comments during the development process.  
547. FFA members commented that the amendments will further improve the quality of vessel 
records in the WCPFC RFV database. These CCMs continued to support the compulsory 
inclusion of the IMO number, which had been part of the original proposal, and offered to 
work with other CCMs to finalise the remaining data requirements. 
548. In reference to one of the two matters noted to not have been taken up in the proposal, a 
CCM supported the Commission making sure all CCMs have completed the minimum 
fields for their vessels on the RFV. They acknowledged that this may be a compliance 
issue that can be taken up through future reviews of implementation of the RFV SSPs. 
Having a fully accurate RFV is an important issue for this CCM. 
549. In response to queries from CCMs, the Interim-Executive Director confirmed that: 
 
the proposed modifications in the RFV SSPs related to the IMO number were to duly 
reflect CMM 2013-04 in the RFV SSPs.  
 
If CCMs prefer, that the IMO number could be displayed on the public website 
version of the RFV more prominently. The placement of the IMO number towards 
the end of the RFV SSPs specifications for excel documents is for technical/database 
reasons. 
 
The proposed abbreviations are mostly based on international codes, existing codes 
have been used where they are available, but where they are not available the 
approach has been a little more arbitrary.  
550. WCPFC11 agreed to the proposed changes contained in Attachment 1 to WCPFC11-
2014-22 and agreed to adopt CMM 2014-03: Conservation and Management Measure 
for Record of Fishing Vessels Standards Specifications and Procedures (RFV-SSPs). 
(Attachment Q). 
9.6 
Responses to Non-Compliance – IWG Report 
551. WCPFC10 established an IWG to develop responses to non-compliance (CMM 2013-02, 
para 24). Advising that there was no paper available for the meeting, the IWG-Responses 
82 
 
to Non-Compliance Chair, Alexa Cole (USA), noted that it became clear from discussions 
at TCC10 that CCMs were thinking about responses to non-compliance and were working 
towards building that into the existing process as the draft revised CMS CMM. The IWG 
Chair noted that Annex 1 was significantly revised to more clearly outline steps for 
corrective action. Language in Annex 1 would allow for sanctions and if that language is 
adopted as part of the new CMS CMM, over the next year this would provide the IWG 
with a basis to put together a process for applying sanctions and ensuring that the relevant 
CCM had sufficient opportunity to respond before corrective actions might be applied. 
552. Japan commented that in the discussion over responses to non-compliance the Commission 
should take prioritization of non-compliance and consistency with Article 25 of the 
Convention into consideration. 
553. The IWG-Responses to Non-Compliance Chair agreed that both are considerations that 
should be part of the process as any possible sanctions for non-compliance are developed. 
9.7 
TCC Workplan 2015 
554. TCC10 recommended that the Commission maintain the existing 2015 TCC Work Plan 
and the Secretariat’s normal practice of preparing draft budget for 2015 and indicative 
budgets for 2016-2017 will continue (para 398).  
555. The Interim-Executive Director noted that the 2015 TCC Workplan (WCPFC11-2014-
FAC8-14) and priorities had been discussed during the FAC meeting, and some CCMs had 
signalled a preference to discuss it further. 
556. WCPFC11 accepted the Summary Report of the Tenth Regular Annual Session of the 
Technical and Compliance Committee. 
 
AGENDA  ITEM  10  -  CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT MEASURE 
PROPOSALS 
557. In addition to proposals to refine the tropical tuna measure CMM 2013-01 for bigeye, 
yellowfin and skipjack tuna in the WCPO (which were considered under Agenda item 6), a 
number of proposals for new CMMs or to refine existing CMMs were considered by the 
Commission. 
10.1 Proposal to refine CMM 2012-07 – Seabirds (USA) 
558. USA introduced proposed revisions to CMM 2012-07 to mitigate impacts of fishing for 
highly migratory fish stocks on seabirds (WCPFC11-2014-DP01), noting that since the 
current CMM has been in place, vessels less than 24 metres in length have been exempt 
from employing seabird mitigation methods when fishing in the Convention Area north of 
23°N. The Commission was supposed to consider the exemption last year and, this year, 
the SC and TCC have not provided evaluations. The USA's proposed revisions to the 
measure phases out the exemption, to be removed by 1 January 2017. The proposal 
includes a process for a CCM to nominate appropriate alternative mitigation measures, 
including identifying alternative minimum technical specifications for small longline 
vessels or areas within which seabird mitigation is not needed by small longline vessels 
83 
 
because of an absence of seabirds, and for the Commission to act on CCMs' requests based 
on the recommendations of the SC and TCC. 
559. Japan stated that it could not support the proposal at this meeting, noting that it is 
continuing to research seabird mitigation measures for small scale fishing vessels in the 
North Pacific. Japan reminded the Commission it has reported that a) a single tori line pole 
with unweighted branch lines is effective in the Northern hemisphere; and b) the current 
specification of the tori line in CMM 2012-07 is not appropriate for small vessels in the 
North Pacific ocean. 
560. Several CCMs supported the proposal, with FFA members noting there is no evidence to 
suggest any difference in seabird interaction rates between smaller vessels and larger ones. 
These CCMs viewed the proposal as a responsible way to reduce the impact of the tuna 
fishery on birds. The proposal allowed flag States and vessel operators time to investigate 
which mitigation measures work best for them and to learn how to use them. These CCMs 
supported a phased-in approach applying mitigation measures to any new fleet. 
561. The Chair noted that the USA should keep working on the proposal. 
562. After consultations during WCPFC11, USA advised on 5 December that there had been no 
progress on the seabird proposal. This CCM requested that the Commission close 
discussion on the measure, but keep working intersessionally on this important issue. 
10.2 Proposal to refine CMM 2011-02 – Commission VMS (USA)  
563. USA described its proposal (WCPFC11-2014-DP02) to revise CMM 2011-02 for the 
Commission VMS as housekeeping for the Commission, to reflect WCPFC9’s 
endorsement of the NC8 commitment to implement VMS in the northwest quadrant of the 
Convention Area.  
564. After consultations during WCPFC11, a revised version of the proposal was circulated 
(WCPFC11-2014-DP02_rev1). The USA noted that the only change being proposed (aside 
from the removal of duplicated para 8) was to add a footnote against para 3 (“3. With 
respect to the area north of 20°N and west of 175°E, the system will be activated at a date 
to be determined by the Commission1”) which reads: “Activated on 31 December 2013.” 
565. WCPFC11 agreed to adopt CMM 2014-02 Conservation and Management Measure 
for Commission VMS, which replaces CMM 2011-02. (Attachment R)  
10.3 Proposals to refine CMM 2010-07 – Sharks 
566. FFA members introduced (WCPFC11-2014-DP03_rev1), advising that they are working 
towards more comprehensive measures for sharks taken in their waters, through 
increasingly stringent Harmonised Minimum Terms and Conditions for access and through 
National Plans of Action. These CCMs noted that for these measures to be fully effective 
they need to be complemented by compatible measures on the high seas. FFA members 
have proposed comprehensive shark measures at previous Commission meetings and have 
taken comments by other CCMs into account in the proposal submitted to WCPFC11. This 
proposal has more flexibility than previous versions, including: 
 
CCMs can choose between two main mitigation measures: banning the use of wire traces 
by their vessels or banning the use of shark lines and using circle hooks with increased 
observer coverage.  
84 
 
 
All vessels to land sharks with all fins, including the tail fin, attached to the shark, but 
some domestic vessels fishing in their EEZ which are subject to additional, stringent 
MCS regimes can continue to land sharks with fins removed.  
567. EU noted its own proposal (WCPFC11-2014-DP17) provided for fins naturally attached, 
and considered the FFA and EU measures could be combined; the delegation would work 
with FFA. The EU observed that there were some weaknesses in the FFA proposal, 
including exceptions to fins naturally attached. The EU saw its approach as more ambitious 
in this respect, and noted that the fin to carcass ratio is impossible to monitor and 
ineffective. The EU didn’t want to run the risk of this methodology continuing, and called 
for more dialogue, if not an SWG to look at the shark measure. 
568. FFA members noted that they are fishing nations as well, and longlining is an important 
part of the economies of many of their members, perhaps more important, proportionally, 
than most non-SIDS CCMs present. The proposed measure does not intend to cripple 
fisheries but to secure a long-term viable future. These CCMs noted that Commission 
members have witnessed the growing trend towards trade restrictions and species retention 
bans, both of which reduce the profitability of longliners but do not change their behaviour. 
Since these measures do not contribute to reducing shark mortality, growth in such 
measures continues. 
569. On 4 December, Palau reported that FFA CCMs has consulted on the draft sharks CMM 
and concerns centred around the finning provisions. A revised version of the proposal had 
been posted for consideration. 
570. Based on further consultations, Palau on behalf of FFA CCMs tabled a revised measure 
(WCPFC11-2014-DP03_rev3) and reported that the proposal had progressed significantly. 
The rev2 document did not receive full support from some CCMs, however agreement was 
reached, in rev3, on a measure that limited the mitigation measures to just a) and b) of the 
original proposed list:  
1. CCMs shall ensure that their vessels comply with at least one of the following options: 
a. do not use or carry wire trace as branch lines or leaders; or 
b. do not use branch lines running directly off the longline floats or drop lines, 
known as shark lines. 
571. Palau noted that the CMM provides for the Commission to review the implementation and 
effectiveness of the measure’s management arrangements, including data requirements, 
after 2 years and consider the application of additional measures for the shark management 
in the Convention area, as appropriate. The CMM does not replace any other CMM. Palau 
noted that it is simple in approach but a step in the right direction for these endangered 
species. 
572. EU thanked FFA members for their efforts and supported the measure, noting that the 
proposal was not its preferred option as this CCM favoured fins naturally attached with no 
exceptions; this CCM recognised that this will have a huge impact particularly on 
vulnerable species. EU expressed disappointment with countries that continue to oppose 
significant progress in the protection of shark species and reminded the Commission that 
there is a lot of work being done at the international level and adopting rev2 would have 
brought forward significant progress. It was regretful that it had to be watered down to 
meet the needs of a few delegations. The EU commented that the Commission cannot think 
it operates in isolation and wondered if the new Executive Director could approach other 
organizations that are carrying out this kind of work and report back to the Commission.  
85 
 
573. Some CCMs were able to go along with the proposal if edits were made to paragraph 2. 
Japan which had proposed to change “avoid catch of highly depleted species” to “release 
highly depleted release” stated that longline fishers cannot avoid bycatch of those species 
practically.  
574. Some CCMs commented that the measure did not go far enough. 
575. One CCM recalled the obligation under the Convention to manage the WCPO fisheries in a 
way that takes account of ecosystem effects and bycatch. This CCM opined that this was a 
small step forward, and could not accept the edit proposed, as “avoid catch of” is an 
important element of the measure. 
576. The EU remarked that a CCM had said at TCC that its fishers did not catch a single 
oceanic whitetip shark, and thought this might be an opportune time for CCMs to inform 
the Commission about techniques to achieve this. The EU saw ‘avoid’ as important, noting 
that there is already an obligation to release silky and oceanic whitetip sharks.  
577. The Vice-Chair closed discussions on the proposals recognising that agreement had been 
reached based on amendments to WCPFC11-2014- DP03 rev3 which had been made on 
screen. 
578. WCPFC11 agreed to adopt CMM 2014-05: Conservation and Management Measure 
for Sharks (Attachment S), and noted that this CMM is not intended to replace or 
prejudice any other Shark CMMs. 
10.4 Port State Measures (FFA) 
579. FFA members proposed a CMM on port State measures, outlined in WCPFC11-2014-
DP04. Revisions had been made to the proposal since its initial consideration at WCPFC10 
and further discussion at TCC10, based on input from other CCMs. FFA members 
emphasized that their proposal was a good starting point on which to build further port 
State-based MCS activities. The proposal maintains the inspection-request mechanism, 
removes the vessel of interest component, the requirement to inspect high risk fishing 
vessels, and includes guidelines for inspection procedures, port inspector training and an 
inspection report. It addresses the special requirements of SIDS.  
580. The EU expressed its support for the proposal, noting that it is stronger this year, and 
incorporates comments provided by delegations.  
581. Some CCMs could not go along with the proposal at this time. 
582. The Chair noted there was no consensus to adopt the measure. 
583. FFA members expressed their disappointment as in these CCMs’ view the measure is much 
needed. They stressed that it is not the FAO Port State Measures Agreement, with which 
some CCMs had confused the proposal. FFA members advised the Commission of their 
commitment to continuing the development of port State measures, and will consider 
implementing this proposal through their internal processes. 
10.5 Proposal to refine CMM 2010-05 – South Pacific Albacore (FFA) 
584. FFA members presented a proposal for a more comprehensive CMM for South Pacific 
albacore tuna, to replace CMM 2010-05 (WCPFC11-2014-DP05). FFA members’ proposal 
covers the entire WCPO range of the stock, promotes cooperation with IATTC, and would 
limit catch rather than effort in part of this area. It defines a total catch limit for the stock, 
set at the latest assessed MSY level – around 100,000t – an interim limit which would be 
86 
 
replaced by a TRP when one is agreed by WCPFC, and proposes that the total stock limit 
be divided into four different sub-limits. There are no flag limits for EEZs, with zone limits 
instead, so fishing nations are not limited by their flag state allocations, which only apply 
on the high seas. Access arrangements are still possible.  
585. American Samoa acknowledged the presence of US Congresswoman Aumua Amata 
Coleman. This CCM described how highly dependent on South Pacific albacore it is. 
Catches in the WCPO have risen dramatically in recent years, while the local fleet has 
declined. The Pago Pago-based longline fleet which principally fishes around American 
Samoa is now effectively unviable. This CCM urged the Commission to agree to limit high 
seas and EEZ catches of this species. American Samoa announced an intention to establish 
a catch limit in its EEZ and wanted to nominate the American Samoa albacore fishery as a 
performance indicator for high seas South Pacific albacore. 
586. On 4 December, FFA members advised that they had met as a group and discussed 
comments received. Later on 4 December, New Zealand reported that it had received 
comments on the draft and would soon be in a position to provide a revised version. 
587. On 5 December, New Zealand noted that South Pacific albacore was one of FFA’s top 
priorities this year. FFA members have engaged with countries with a strong interest. A 
range of opinions were offered but few specifics, with the exception of the USA’s written 
comments.  
588. USA strongly supported many aspects of the proposed shift in the CMM from effort based 
to catch based measures, and noted that limiting catches of South Pacific albacore in-zone 
and on the high seas is a necessary change. The USA would like to see more support for 
the shift to catch limits, and actual controls of catch limits that are in place.  
589. Several CCMs supported the proposal, noting general concern with the management of 
these stocks. 
590. A few other CCMs could not support the proposal, with concerns including: a) no new 
stock assessment has been carried out on South Pacific albacore, so it was premature to 
consider establishing a catch limit; b) if FFA member countries want to establish a catch 
limit transfer, it should be applied to all the WCPFC stocks, not just South Pacific albacore; 
c) establishing separate high seas and waters under national jurisdiction catch limits is not 
suitable for tropical tuna species; d) para 1 of the measure was deleted and that had 
included catch and effort limits; e) longline fishing effort and capacity should not be 
transferred to other parts of the Convention area; f) there was no evident justification for 
changing the 2001-2004 baseline; g) the kind of transfers envisaged among PNA members 
should be applied to all members.  
591. Sympathising with FFA members’ concerns on recent expansion in catch of this species, 
Japan requested that effort limit provided in paragraph 1 of the current measure should be 
maintained. Japan also stated that CCMs shall not transfer longline fishing effort and 
capacity to areas within the Convention Area north of the equator in order not to undermine 
the effectiveness of the measure.  
592. EU had submitted its concerns to FFA and was fairly certain it could support the measure. 
593. One CCM considered that only targeted fishing for South Pacific albacore between 10 and 
15˚S should be subject to management and should not apply to CCMs which do not 
actively fish for South Pacific albacore between 10 and 20˚S. This CCM noted that the 
tables do not contain exact data as high seas catch is not submitted. 
87 
 
594. Samoa commented that although the Tokelau Arrangement has only just come into effect, 
the Harvest Strategy for the South Pacific Albacore Fishery and associated rules have been 
in place for two years. The high seas are subject only to CMM 2010-05, which simply 
limits the number of vessels actively fishing for South Pacific albacore south of 20°S above 
2005 or 2000-2004 levels, and requires CCMs to report their albacore catch and bycatch 
south of 20°S. The high seas between the equator and 20°S are subject to no limits. 
595. One CCM commented that it would be useful to get SPC’s opinion but noted the SC’s 
consensus that longline fishing mortality and catch of South Pacific albacore should be 
reduced to avoid further declines and possibly exceeding the LRP, and maintaining 
economically viable catch rates. These CCMs stated that nothing is gained by waiting for 
the next stock assessment, except perhaps the need to adopt more stringent limits. 
596. The Cook Islands commented that coastal states are moving towards zone-based 
management and seek some high seas compatibility, observing that there is a tremendous 
amount of albacore being caught in the high seas pocket next to the Cook Islands EEZ. 
This CCM stated that there is insufficient scientific data to set an Olympic TAC or MSY. 
597. The Chair suggested sending the proposal back to FFA CCMs to work these issues 
through. However, New Zealand commented that it may not happen this year. 
598. The Cook Islands suggested re-engaging with CCMs in the margins. 
599. After more consultations held on the last day of WCPFC11, New Zealand, on behalf of 
FFA CCMs, reported there was no further progress.  
600. Niue’s Minister of Natural Resources, Hon. Billy Talagi, expressed disappointment on 
behalf of FFA and commented that the Commission’s process left him wondering how the 
region’s fish stocks will be managed sustainably and how Niue can ever develop its 
fisheries. The Honourable Minister lamented that his country’s fishermen will now see no 
hope in their waters and the people of Niue are prevented from participating in their own 
fishery because of those developing their fisheries just outside the waters of Niue. The 
Honourable Minister observed that it looked as though it will be left to SIDS to take the 
necessary management action in their area of influence, Pacific Island nations’ EEZs.  
601. The Vice-Chair closed discussion on this proposal. 
10.6 Provision of operational level catch and effort data (FFA) 
602. RMI presented the FFA proposal for a CMM on operational data (WCPFC11-2014-DP06), 
which requires operational data to be provided in accordance with the standards set out in 
the data rules, revises the data rules to remove the reference to domestic legal constraints, 
noting that the exemption was provided to CCMs some ten years ago, and requires the 
Commission to take into account provision of data in any allocation as set out in Article 10 
of the Convention. FFA expects that the CMM will also provide a basis for the Executive 
Director to implement the existing requirement that a CCM’s access to non-public domain 
WCPFC data is removed for CCMs that fail to comply with WCPFC data provision rules. 
It was noted that SIDS are providing operational level catch and effort data, even those 
with the smallest administrations.  
603. The Chair noted that an agreement would be welcome so the Commission can begin to get 
all the information it should be getting to assist science and management in the WCPO.  
604. Indonesia stated that it had some concerns and was directed by the Chair to make RMI 
aware of those concerns. 
88 
 
605. Some CCMs expressed support for the measure. 
606. One CCM asked whether the proposal clarifies that if a country has provided aggregated 
data it still has an obligation to provide operational data. RMI responded that the proposal 
aims for the provision of operational level data, with the provision of aggregated data not 
sufficient. 
607. During WCPFC11, FFA members and the six Asian countries worked together on an 
agreement relating to operational data, which was considered in the amendments that were 
agreed to CMM 2013-01 Conservation and Management Measure on Bigeye, Yellowfin 
and Skipjack in the WCPO. See Agenda item 6.2.1. 
608. There was otherwise no further discussion on the proposed CMM on operational data 
(WCPFC11-2014-DP06). 
10.7 Proposal to refine CMM 2007-01 – Regional Observer Programme (FFA) 
609. FFA members introduced a proposal (WCPFC11-2014-DP07) for amendments to the 
CMM for the Regional Observer Programme (CMM 2007-01) and asked that the 
Commission agree to its recommendation to remove the provision that would see observer 
reports provided to vessel masters, for the following reasons: 
a. it directly compromises the safety and impartiality of the observer; 
b. it has created confusion amongst flag States on how they can gain access to ROP data; 
c. it is contrary to the Commission’s rules and procedures for the protection, access to, 
and dissemination of data; and 
d. it is impractical. 
610. FFA members stated that observer safety concerns override the reasons for the paragraph’s 
inclusion in the CMM; concerns that are based on observers’ compliance role and 
documented cases of intimidation. These CCMs feel that this issue has created confusion 
around flag states accessing observer data to demonstrate their vessels’ compliance. This 
confusion also arises in some CCMs’ understanding of reporting requirements. 
611. FFA members reported on 4 December that no CCMs had expressed concerns, and asked 
that the proposal be tabled for adoption by WCPFC11. 
612. Japan commented that the independence of the observer is important but it was more 
important that observers and fishermen promote mutual understanding on their activities on 
the vessel. Japan stated that it was essential for them to have regular conversations with 
each other in order to promote mutual understanding. Japan believed the proposal would 
make the situation of observers on board worse by reducing communication although its 
aim is to protect them, therefore could not support the proposal. 
613. Some CCMs expressed the view that a careful balance was needed on observer issues, and 
if the Commission is going to look at the ROP, it should take the time to review the whole 
programme, not parts of it. 
614. One CCM commented that the proposal points to the importance of better working 
relationships between observer providers and flag States and expressed the view that the 
relationship between the FFA and USA was a good model. This CCM could not support 
the proposal to delete para 1 of Attachment K, Annex B of CMM 2007-01, believing that 
respecting the contents of observer reports and preventing errors in the report are two 
different issues. This CCM commented that during on board inspections in port, an 
inspector shows the report to the vessel master for signature, which cross-checks important 
facts. If the observer report has compliance-related information, para 1 verifies the fact 
89 
 
between the observer and vessel master. This CCM suggested that if the current provision 
compromises observer safety, perhaps the vessel master could have the opportunity to read 
the observer report once the vessel has returned to port and the observer has disembarked. 
615. One CCM reminded CCMs that the Commission has been having this discussion for a few 
years. The proposal aims to simply remove the impracticality and confusion around this 
provision – observers are compliance officers and are on board to report. It is not 
appropriate for them to even have a conversation about matters they have to report on. It is 
also impractical, as observers are subsequently debriefed through a rigorous process.  
616. Japan expressed the view that the provision should be improved, not simply deleted. 
617. The Vice-Chair commented that this was an ongoing issue and CCMs should find some 
middle ground before the Commission discusses it again. 
10.8 Management Objectives process-related proposals 
10.8.1 Harvest Strategy Proposal (FFA)  
618. FFA members introduced (WCPFC11-2014-DP09 rev_1), which establishes a formal 
framework for the development of harvest strategy approaches for the WCPO’s key 
fisheries. A resource of such importance to many coastal states, especially SIDS, demands 
a formal management structure to ensure it is properly managed. The proposal notes the 
work the Commission and some members have already done on elements of harvest 
strategies. The proposal asks the Commission to commit to a formal management 
framework and outlines the key elements needed for this framework to operate. FFA 
members expressed their gratitude for comments received and asked for some time in 
which a small working group could meet to progress the proposal.  
619. The Chair noted the request for an SWG. 
620. After consultations during WCPFC11, on 4 December Australia reported that the working 
group had met and a revised draft would be circulated for further comments, preferably in 
writing. After further consultations, Australia advised that WCPFC11-2014-DP09_rev4 
was available and hoped to get a sense as to the Commission’s position in plenary.  
621. Several CCMs supported the initiative.  
622. EU noted that it was one of the CCMs which had provided comments, which had been 
taken into account, and noted that this work was of extreme importance and money was 
allocated in the budget to bring it forward. 
623. Canada commented that it moves the Commission in the right direction in providing clear 
parameters, both in terms of harvest strategies and implementation of Article 6, which calls 
for the application of the precautionary approach. 
624. One CCM needed more time to consider the revised proposal, but in general had no 
difficulty going along with the proposal. 
625. Japan confirmed it can support the proposal. 
626. The Chair commented that the comments around the table were encouraging, and asked the 
group to review the draft measure and get back to Australia. 
627. After further consultations during WCPFC11, Australia tabled a revised proposal (rev5), 
explaining that there had been a formatting issue with rev4 but rev5 was the same in 
substance. On behalf of FFA CCMs, Australia sought support to adopt it.  
90 
 
628. WCPFC11 agreed to adopt CMM 2014-06: Conservation and Management Measure 
to develop and implement a harvest strategy approach for key fisheries and stocks in 
the WCPO (Attachment T).  
10.8.2 Skipjack target reference point (PNA+ Tokelau) 
629. PNA members and Tokelau presented WCPFC11-2014-DP12, a draft CMM to establish a 
TRP for skipjack, which is a further step for the WCPFC in implementing the 
precautionary approach through the application of reference points and a response to SC 
advice that the Commission take action to avoid further increases in fishing mortality, keep 
the skipjack stock around the current levels, and adopt a TRP and harvest control rules. The 
measure proposes that the Commission adopt a skipjack TRP of 50% of the spawning 
biomass without fishing, aiming to cap at around 50% the depletion of the adult skipjack 
stock by fishing, which is broadly consistent with maintaining fishing effort at the 2012 
level, aiming to maintain economic conditions at their current levels with similar skipjack 
catch rates and catch size distribution to that seen now. In the short term, these CCMs hope 
to see the TRP used as a basis for scientific advice on skipjack and work on comprehensive 
purse seine effort levels. The TRP is a necessary component of a harvest strategy. 
630. The Chair encouraged delegates to work with PNA and Tokelau to get the proposal ready 
for adoption, reminding the Commission that Japan has proposed a different TRP and the 
preference is to reconcile them and not have two different proposals. 
631. After consultations held during WCPFC11, Tuvalu advised the Commission on 5 
December that consensus was not reached on the PNA + Tokelau proposal, with CCMs 
close to agreement except for one CCM, which was deeply disappointing.  
632. Japan stated that the lack of data is a serious problem to determine TRP of skipjack and 
will do its best effort to report those data intersessionally for WCPFC12.  
10.8.3 Skipjack target reference point (Japan) 
633. Japan presented its proposal for a draft conservation and management measure on a target 
reference point of 60% of the estimated recent average spawning biomass in the absence of 
fishing for skipjack tuna (WCPFC11-2014-DP13), noting that skipjack tuna is a widely 
distributed stock through almost the entire WCPFC area, from 40˚N to 40˚S. Most of the 
catch comes from the tropical purse seine fisheries and in the west Island states in Areas 4 
and 5. Japan observed that management interest appears to have focused on the tropical 
purse seine fisheries, with the difficulties of other areas overlooked. Skipjack stock is 
healthy according to the scientists, but Japan expressed the view that poor migration to 
northern area has been occurring, and is a problem. At beginning of the 2000s the catch 
decreased dramatically and has not come back to previous levels. The proposal is that the 
skipjack tuna resource should be recovered to the level before the local depletion was 
observed. Japan noted its efforts in scientific research, citing the four major skipjack 
migration routes to Japan, the western-most route shows a clear decrease in migration 
volume. Looking at this migration route and combining with tidal currents and area 
impacts as assessed by SC, Japan stated that it is clear that the origins of the western 
migration route are Areas 5 and 4, which are the most depleted areas for skipjack. Japan 
believes the local depletion problem can be solved by joint efforts of those members 
located in Areas 4 and 5. Japan proposes the TRP be set precautionary at 60% of the 
estimated recent average spawning biomass in the absence of fishing. Japan proposed that 
the approach should be consistent with other principles set forth in the Convention: a) 
stocks be managed in their entirety (Art. 5); b) due respect for artisanal fisheries (Art. 5 
91 
 
(h)); c) historic catch in an area (Art. 10. 3 (c)); and d) the needs of coastal communities 
which are dependent mainly on fishing for the stock (Art. 10.3 (g)). A copy of the 
presentation from Japan was tabled as WCPFC11-2014-DP26. 
634. The Chair thanked Japan for its presentation. This skipjack target reference proposal was 
not further discussed in plenary during WCPFC11. 
10.9 Compliance Monitoring Scheme 
10.9.1 Comments on the Compliance Monitoring Scheme (FFA) 
635. FFA members gave their support for the CMS in seeking to assess compliance by CCMs. 
Further improvements can be made to the process. Referring delegations to WCPFC11-
2014-DP10, FFA members noted that the number of obligations assessed each year has 
increased and will continue to do so as the Commission adopts more CMMs and more 
categories are added. These CCMs noted that the Commission has gone from reviewing 14 
CMMs and scientific data rules in 2011 to 25 CMMs, Convention provisions and scientific 
data rules in 2014, and observed that the CMS small working group took the majority of 
the TCC’s time at TCC10. Allowing CCMs to provide additional information up to 30 days 
prior to the Commission meeting adds to this work. 15 CCMs have indicated that they have 
additional information which would revisit 79 potential compliance issues. FFA members 
have noted in previous meetings that this means members must review additional 
information in the margins of a heavily scheduled Commission meeting, which prolongs 
the review of information that are already for activities which took place the previous year. 
The current practice of assessing CMMs and rules for the relevant categories both at TCC 
and the Commission meeting cannot be sustained. The Commission should prioritize what 
gets assessed, and the FFA paper offers suggestions.  
636. FFA members also provided a second paper (WCPFC11-2014-DP23) specifically related 
to the CMS assessments of SIDS.  During WCPFC11 discussions of the recommendations 
proposed by FFA CCMs took place initially in the context of the presentation of the 
TCC10 Summary Report Recommendations related to the CMS process. Subsequently the 
draft recommendations were considered in turn through reporting back from the SWG led 
by the TCC Vice-Chair on the proposed CMM for CMS. The discussions and subsequent 
WCPFC11 outcomes based on the FFA recommendations have been grouped here into four 
topics: 
i. 
List of suggested priorities for compliance review by TCC11: 
637. Noting that WCPFC11 had earlier agreed to prioritize the obligations that will be assessed 
by the CMS (paragraph 63 of TCC10 Summary Report), WCPFC11 considered a proposal 
from FFA members for a list of priority obligations for assessment in 2015 as set out in 
WCPFC11-2014-DP10. These include: operational data and aggregated data reporting and 
Annual Reports, catch and effort limits for key target species, and MCS tools. FFA 
members noted that they based this priority list on two key considerations:  
(i) the crucial limits to ensure that fishing mortality for key target species are being 
maintained within sustainable limits and thereby fulfil the objective of the Convention – 
where non-compliance with such limits carry significant risk to the fisheries; and 
(ii) ensuring there is appropriate and sufficient information and verification tools which 
are fundamental to the Commission’s ability to make well-informed and meaningful 
assessments and decisions. 
92 
 
638. The Chair observed that there needs to be a sense of priority, and noted that the concerns or 
recommendations from the Commission’s subsidiary bodies would be useful to hear. 
639. One CCM commented that a compliance assessment should be based on the requirement 
which is clearly written in CMM and Commission text.  
640. The Interim-Executive Director agreed that the Commission should discuss what to 
prioritize in the CMS next year, as the CMR has become very large with a vast number of 
rows of information contained in the draft and provisional compliance monitoring reports. 
The Secretariat encouraged the Commission to consider prioritizing the measures it would 
like the CMR to concentrate on. The Interim-Executive Director noted that, owing to the 
new CMMs that came into effect in 2014, the proposed new draft CMM on CMS tabled for 
consideration at WCPFC11 (WCPFC11-2014-19a) would seem to suggest that next year’s 
draft CMR may be longer than this year’s CMR. The length of this year’s CMR did present 
challenges for CCMs, the TCC and the Secretariat.  
641. The Chair suggested that the list of priority issues for the next compliance monitoring 
review, which may not be an all-inclusive list, be sent to the small working group.  
642. During WCPFC11, the SWG Chair reported that a list of priority obligations was included 
in WCPFC11-2014-29. This list was prepared recognising that there is a large burden on 
TCC to get through its work. 
643. Japan commented that it could accept the proposed list on the condition that there was a 
footnote against “operational data”, along the lines that ‘non-provision of operational data 
is not itself non-compliance if aggregated data and size data are submitted, according to 
section 3 of the data rules.’  Japan noted that some non-compliance issues in FAD closure 
raised by observer reports discussed at TCC10 are due to extreme implementation of the 
FAD definition and requested to add a footnote against “FAD Closure” along the lines that 
“practical implementation of FAD definition should also be considered”.  
644. The FFA Secretariat recalled that the issue this CCM had was about the obligation to 
provide catch and effort data, but clarified that the list was only about what would be 
assessed, not what each obligation meant.  
645. The Chair asked if there had been any objection in the SWG to them. Japan responded that 
no participant except for FFA Secretariat and Japan made comments on the proposed list in 
the small group and that its comments (paragraph 642 of this report) were not reflected in 
WCPFC11-2014-29.  
646. One CCM stated that this was just a list and that the substantive discussions will take place 
at TCC.  
647. WCPFC11 agreed that the list of obligations contained in Attachment U will replace 
the obligations contained in paragraph 3 of CMM 2014-07 Conservation and 
Management Measure for Compliance Monitoring Scheme and reflect the obligations 
that the Secretariat will assess for consideration by TCC11 during the Compliance 
Monitoring Scheme. 
ii. 
Convene CMS Working Group prior to TCC for at least two days in order to complete the 
review of each CCM and develop the draft Provisional Report, before convening TCC proper 
for three days. 
648. FFA members proposed that the Commission formally recognise the CMS as a core 
function of TCC and specifically dedicate time to this work (WCPFC11-2014-DP10). They 
suggest that the CMS SWG convenes for at least 2 days prior to TCC, to review each CCM 
93 
 
and develop the draft provisional report, then convene TCC proper for the following 3 
days. 
649. One CCM expressed the view that if the recommendation was intended to dedicate 
sufficient time for the CMS SWG, this would not achieve that. This year’s deliberations 
took three of the five days, not two. This CCM’s preference is to extend TCC by one day, 
which reflects how long TCC takes and will continue to take.  
650. The Chair noted that this would make TCC 6 days in duration. 
651. The EU noted that if the Commission was prioritizing measures to be examined, the 
Secretariat could be tasked to analyze which CMMs are related to provision of data or 
deadlines, which do not need so much time. The EU preferred to do the work in two days 
rather than three, and suggested it may be possible to streamline the work. 
652. One CCM observed that by convening this work separately, before TCC proper, those who 
did not have to be there could go later. New Zealand supported ‘at least’ two days, but 
thought if the list could be prioritized, it should only take two days.  
653. The Chair asked if it would be sufficient that in setting the agenda for this year’s TCC, the 
TCC Chair and Secretariat would ensure the CMS gets adequate attention within the 
agenda and at the meeting and could come back next year with a more definitive proposal 
if that does not work. It is clear that the CMS is a serious part of the Commission’s 
business now. The Chair also observed that it would not be easy for non-English speakers 
to work that intensively for so long. He also suggested that the Commission understood 
that there was a need to provide adequate time to conduct the compliance review. 
654. One CCM made the observation that for at least the last two years, the Sunday is used at 
TCC for the small working group, which is a 12 hour work day, so effectively an extra day 
is already being worked by many. If the rules of procedure require a Commission decision 
to extend the meeting duration then that should be done here; it could not be put off. 
655. One CCM opposed the recommendation, stating that once TCC starts the meeting gets a lot 
of work completed. Most of TCC’s time is allocated to the CMS process and this CCM 
could not agree to expand by more days. The CMS is an important task but TCC has other 
important tasks and the Commission’s capacity and budget should be considered  
656. The Chair noted that extending TCC has budgetary implications which would need to go 
before FAC.  
657. WCPFC11 subsequently agreed that TCC11 would be extended by a day (see Agenda 
12.5)  
iii. 
Conduct an independent audit and review of where the Commission stands in relation to 
delivering on the CMS objectives. The specific tasks could include an analysis of what 
impacts, if any, has the CMS had and what difference has it made in terms of any trends in 
compliance.  
658. FFA members noted they are generally supportive of the current process used to undertake 
the CMR, but noted their belief that there is a need to task an independent review and audit 
of the CMS process to take stock of where the Commission stands in terms of its 
effectiveness and where efficiency gains can be made in meeting the CMS’ objectives.  
659. Responding to a query from one CCM, the Interim-Executive Director responded that she 
expected the proposed independent audit would have budget implications. 
660. Several CCMs expressed the view that an independent look at the CMS will improve it.  
94 
 
661. The EU noted that the Commission budget was already increasing this year. An audit 
would require additional resources. This CCM asked the Secretariat for costings, 
suggesting a consultancy might cost USD50,000. 
662. One CCM noted that the CMS was just a few years old and was still finding its feet. It may 
be premature to put it through such a review and perhaps when the Commission has a 
longer term CMS measure it might be more appropriate. 
663. One CCM noted that the measure had been in place for four years and was getting some 
footing. The audit would do a stock take, to ensure it is meeting its objectives. This CCM 
noted that the TOR would look at impacts and any difference the scheme has made. 
664. The Chair summarized that it was an excellent idea but as a logistical issue, the 
Commission is going to amend the measure and engaging a consultant while it is being 
amended does not necessarily make good sense. The Chair suggested going through the 
revised scheme at the next TCC and then have the analytical work done.  
665. The Interim-Executive Director recognized the CMS was a scheme which is still being 
shaped. The Secretariat sees merit in advice being given on the CMS and whether the 
volume of information the CCMs and TCC are being asked to review each year in CMRs, 
is achieving what people are hoping the CMS will achieve. To assist the Commission’s 
consideration the Secretariat offered to look at costing. 
666. Reflecting on the comments, one CCM suggested it might be better to revisit the proposal 
next year. 
667. One CCM cautioned that if the CMS process runs for too much longer without analysis, the 
Commission might get set in its ways, which risked only tinkering around the edges.  
668. Some CCMs disagreed with the approach of independent audit of the measure. Japan stated 
that if there are difficulties with the measure, it is the members’ responsibility to change it.  
669. The Chair asked if an audit should be set in motion now, or after the Commission has 
amended the measure and it is applied at TCC.  
670. EU observed that the Commission has not even tried the new process and, though not 
opposed to the audit, done at the right time it would be more meaningful and beneficial. 
671. One CCM asked the Secretariat to provide some costings and asked for a commitment to 
agree a Workplan to do this in the near future. 
672. The Chair noted costs should be prepared for inclusion in planning for the following year. 
673. Reflecting on its capacity, one CCM preferred a process which would continue on a trial 
basis while CCMs work through deficiencies at a national level. This CCM was especially 
concerned about the sanction part of the process, which would present difficulties. 
674. WCPFC11 agreed that there should be an audit of the CMS at some point. The 
Secretariat was tasked with preparing a paper for TCC11, which will include 
consideration of the costs of conducting an independent audit of the CMS.  
iv. 
Proposal to amend the CMM to provide for further recognition of the special requirements of 
SIDS in the CMS process (WCPFC11-2014-DP23)  
675. FFA members expressed the view that despite the clear obligation under Article 30 to assist 
SIDS, the Commission is only just beginning to actively mainstream the consideration of 
impacts on SIDS into the decision making of the Commission. Yet the Commission 
assesses SIDS against obligations that have been put in place over the last 10 years that did 
95 
 
not, when they were created, benefit from CMM 2013-06’s questions. These CCMs stated 
that continuing to rate these CCMs as non-compliant marginalizes them.  
676. FFA members proposed an approach that in their view builds a fairer way of dealing with 
SIDS in the CMS process, starting with the Annual Reports, where SIDS can flag a specific 
assistance need early. The Secretariat and the SIDS can then develop an implementation 
plan, which will require a template to be developed which elaborates the assistance need 
and what it requires, and a plan and timeframes to meet it. The implementation plan would 
identify a budget and include funding sources for any financial assistance. It would be 
attached as part of the dCMR for each CCM, and would be part of the documentation 
reviewed by the TCC. Where TCC accepts an assistance need as genuine and its existence 
has meant the SIDS cannot fulfil a particular obligation, the TCC would not assess that 
obligation and would instead recommend to the Commission to allow the implementation 
plan to run through its agreed timeframes. Until the end of that agreed timeframe, the SIDS 
would not be assessed against that particular obligation. At the end of the agreed timeframe 
the need should have been met and the SIDS can then be assessed against that obligation. 
FFA members believed this approach recognises the unique and vulnerable situation of 
SIDS and territories. The majority of WCPFC CCMs are SIDS and territories, and the 
majority of fishing takes place in the waters of SIDS. WCPFC must find ways to shape 
measures and processes that include SIDS as equal partners and implementers of decisions.  
677. WCPFC11 agreed to further consider the proposal set out in WCPFC11-2014-DP23 
through the small working group which was tasked with preparing a revised CMM for the 
Compliance Monitoring Scheme (see Agenda 10.9.2). 
10.9.2 Proposal for CMM on Compliance Monitoring Scheme (TCC Vice-Chair) 
678. TCC Vice-Chair, Alexa Cole (USA), noted that the current CMS measure expires at the 
end of the year and directed CCMs to a revised measure (WCPFC11-2014-19a), noting 
that it was a redlined copy of last year’s measure. The TCC Vice-Chair noted that she had 
received comments on the proposal and was in the process of putting together a revised 
version in advance of the SWG discussions on 3 December at WCPFC11. This version will 
reflect discussions from the CMS-SWG held during TCC, Australia, FFA and Japan’s 
comments intersessionally and discussions which occurred during the CMS SWG sessions 
during WCPFC11. 
679. After consultations during WCPFC11, the TCC Vice-Chair reported that the CMS CMM 
SWG was working through a number of proposed changes in WCPFC11-2014-DP23 and 
WCPFC11-2014-DP20_rev2 regarding capacity building for SIDS and prioritizing 
obligations, and was preparing a revised draft of the CMM. 
680. On 5 December, the TCC Vice-Chair reported that a revision of the draft CMM for the 
Compliance Monitoring Scheme, WCPFC-2014-19a rev 1, had been posted and circulated. 
She noted that this draft reflects very productive discussions during several working group 
sessions during the week. There was broad agreement on many of the suggested revisions 
and the discussions provided several helpful new concepts that will improve the 
Compliance Monitoring process. The TCC Vice-Chair expressed that she would welcome 
any comments on the proposed revisions, but noted that it may not be possible to finalize 
the substantial revisions at this meeting 
681. WCPFC11 agrees to extend the existing CMM on the Compliance Monitoring 
Scheme, CMM 2013-02, for one additional year, and to modify paragraph 26 to read 
as follows: “This measure will be effective for 2015 only.”  
96 
 
682. WCPFC11 agreed to adopt: CMM 2014-07 Conservation and Management Measure 
for Compliance Monitoring Scheme (Attachment V)  
683. WCPFC11 agrees that it is a priority to complete the work of revising and updating 
the Compliance Monitoring Scheme CMM, including addressing the proposals of 
FFA to address the capacity building needs of SIDS. WCPFC11 agrees that the 
United States will continue to progress this proposal intersessionally for adoption at 
WCPFC12. 
684. The TCC Vice-Chair also provided a draft recommendation from the SWG that the 
Commission agree to use the same template for preparation of the draft Compliance 
Monitoring Report in 2015 as was agreed last year at WCPFC10. 
685. WCPFC11 agrees that the Secretariat will use the same template adopted at 
WCPFC10 for preparation of the draft Compliance Monitoring Report in 2015. 
(Attachment W) 
686. The International Seafood Sustainability Foundation made a statement on behalf of ISSF, 
WWF, Pew and Greenpeace, noting that this group has twice written (in 2013 and 2014) to 
the Commission to express their collective concerns regarding transparency in the 
Compliance Monitoring Scheme process (see WCPFC11-2014-OP13). These organizations 
expressed the following points: 
a. The principle of transparency is a fundamental hallmark of responsible 
collective management and all other tuna RFMOs allow accredited observers to 
attend their compliance committees, including making appropriate materials 
under discussion available either in advance of or during these sessions.  
b. During the working group to revise the CMS, observer organizations offered 
several suggestions to balance the need to protect confidential information while 
also ensuring appropriate observer participation. Unfortunately, these 
suggestions were not afforded any discussion or consideration and the CMS 
process remains closed. 
c. Concern regarding compliance has been at the heart of a number of CMM 
negotiation discussions this week, highlighting the critical importance of a 
robust and transparent compliance process.  
d. The Commission has a responsibility, under international law and under its own 
Convention, to promote transparency in its work and decision-making. We look 
forward to working further with delegations on revisions to the CMS CMM 
during the intersessional process and seeing further action in this regard at the 
next Commission meeting.  
 
10.10 Proposal for CMM on Fisheries and Access Agreement Information 
687. The EU noted that this was the third year it had proposed this CMM (WCPFC11-2014-
DP18), explaining that the primary reason for the proposal is transparency. The proposal 
asks that fisheries access agreements between coastal states and fishing nations are made 
publicly available. The EU clarified that its proposal was the same as for the last two years. 
688. FFA members stated that they did not support the proposal due to commercial sensitivities 
and the perception of interference by others on issues relating to national waters. These 
CCMs noted that the proponent has not taken these issues into account. 
97 
 
689. The EU responded that it hoped to receive comments from FFA members to enable it to 
better understand the precise nature of these members’ concerns, and would appreciate 
continuing a dialogue on this issue. 
AGENDA  ITEM  11  -  REPORT OF THE FINANCE AND 
ADMINISTRATION COMMITTEE 
11.1 Budget approval for 2015 and indicative budgets for 2016 and 2017 
690. The Co-Chair of the FAC, Dr Paul Callaghan, tabled the report of the eighth meeting of the 
FAC, including a proposed Commission budget for 2015 in the amount of USD7,428,298 
for WCPFC11’s approval (WCPFC11-2014-23). The FAC met three times during 
WCPFC11. 
691. The FAC Co-Chair presented the report’s main points and recommendations, noting that: 
 
FAC8 recommended that the FAM update the figures in WCPFC11-2014-FAC8-06 and 
that it be forwarded to WCPFC11 for endorsement. FAC8 recommended that the 
Secretariat continue to pursue unpaid contributions. (para 16 and 17) 
 
FAC8 agreed to include a line item in the amount of USD25,000 in the 2015 WCPFC 
Budget for a job sizing exercise to be conducted for the WCPFC Secretariat by a 
consultant. (para 21) 
 
FAC8 considered that the Interim-Executive Director should be compensated at the entry 
level Executive Director pay-grade (assuming this is higher than the Interim-Executive 
Director’s current pay grade) and be entitled to work-related allowances such as use of 
the Executive Director’s vehicle and business class travel. This compensation and 
allowance would only apply to an Interim-Executive Director appointed for a minimum 
term of four weeks and would apply through the Interim-Executive Director appointment. 
(para 27) 
 
FAC8 agreed that the cost increases faced by the Commission are of concern. FAC8 
agreed to task the Executive Director to undertake a review which would present options 
for a more sustainable budget in the longer term including cost savings and identifying 
other sources/methods of revenue. (para 40) 
 
FAC8 agreed that developing harvest control rules is a high priority activity and should 
be funded. It was agreed to transfer USD83,000 from the SC budget for “other” projects 
(ranked by the SC as not high priority) to support the MOW in 2015. (para 47) 
 
FAC8 agreed to a budget of USD113,000 for Targeted Capacity Building for 2015 which 
is comprised of a contribution of USD100,000 from Australia and USD13,000 from the 
WCPFC 2015 budget. (para 51)2 
 
FAC8 agreed to include a line item in the amount of USD65,000 for regional capacity 
building workshops for 2015, and provisionally for 2016-2017. (para 58) 
                                                      
 
2 Secretariat note: In comments provided on the draft report Australia has clarified that its contribution 
noted here to targeted capacity building would be via existing support directly to the FFA Secretariat.   
98 
 
 
FAC8 confirmed its support for a line item in the WCPFC budget of USD20,000 entitled 
“funding for Chair of Commission or subsidiary bodies if they are from a developing 
state”. (para 61) 
 
FAC8 agreed to include a line item in the amount of USD7,800 to cover additional costs 
(DSA, venue and catering) associated with extending TCC by an additional day. (para 
63). 
692.  It was further noted that the final 2015 budget figure would be finalised once decisions on 
the port coordinators proposal and the election of a new Chair were reached at WCPFC11. 
In addition, if it is agreed that WCPFC12 will be held over a weekend, an extra USD8,000 
will need to be built into the Commission budget. 
693. WCPFC11 adopted the summary report and recommendations of FAC8 (WCPFC11-
2014-23 – Attachment X) and an eventual Commission budget for 2015 of 
USD7,556,298 (Attachment Y).  
 
AGENDA  ITEM  12  -  ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS 
12.1 Appointment of new Executive Director 
694. The five candidates shortlisted for the Executive Director position were interviewed by 
Contracting Parties during a meeting of their heads of delegation, and observed by 
members and participating territories, on Tuesday 2 December 2014 (WCPFC11-2014-24 
and WCPFC11-2014-IP11). 
695. The Chair reported to the Commission the outcome of the appointment process on the 
morning of Wednesday 3 December 2014, advising that the top candidate was Mr Feleti P 
Teo OBE (Tuvalu). The Chair invited Mr Teo to address the Commission.  
696. Mr Teo thanked the Chair, Ministers and heads of delegation for the opportunity to address 
the Commission as the Commission’s Executive Director designated to lead the Secretariat 
for the next four years. Mr Teo was humbled by the strong indication of trust and 
confidence in him and while he was still coming to terms with the enormity of the 
responsibility bestowed on him he assured the Commission that he would take on the 
charge of looking after the Secretariat. He noted that it was a joint responsibility and he 
asked each Commission member for support and assistance. Mr Teo thanked his 
government and particularly Minister Elisala Pita for their support even though the process 
had not required such support. Mr Teo sincerely looked forward to working with the 
Commission. 
697. The Chair noted that he likewise looked forward to working with Mr Teo and that he will 
inherit a very competent Secretariat whose staff will assist him. The Chair observed that 
the interview and appointment process had worked well but there were a few aspects which 
concerned him and he will refer these concerns to FAC to make the procedure more 
efficient. 
698. On the last day of WCPFC11, the Chair advised the Commission that a contract had been 
signed by the incoming Executive Director and that he would be starting in March 2015. 
99 
 
12.2 GEF ABNJ Programme 
699. At WCPFC9, the Commission endorsed participation and in-kind co-financing for the 
Global Environment Facility (GEF) Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction (ABNJ) 
Sustainable Management of Tuna Fisheries and Biodiversity Project (Tuna Project). Mr 
Alejandro Anganuzzi, Project Coordinator for GEF-ABNJ Programme, provided a briefing 
on the current status of the Tuna Project (WCPFC11-2014-25), one of four projects under 
the Common Oceans Programme which aims to achieve global sustainable fisheries in 
ABNJ. The structure of the Tuna Project is based on partnerships with institutions 
including the five tuna RFMOs, governments, NGOs and subregional initiatives. WCPFC 
is a direct partner of the project. Mr Alejandro Anganuzzi stated that the Tuna Project can 
support the implementation of another MOW.  
700. The Tuna project has three components: 
 
Sustainable management: aims at the full implementation of the precautionary approach 
through the adoption of harvest strategies in the t-RFMOs. The Tuna Project will also 
support the preparation of ecosystem approach plans in each RFMO. 
 
Reduce IUU fishing: supported through a number of strategies including capacity 
building for enforcement officers through establishing certification-based training; direct 
support to various initiatives to improve compliance by RFMO developing State 
members; creating templates to facilitate port State measures’ incorporation into national 
legislations; pilot e-monitoring trials; development of guidelines on best practices for 
MCS and market controls and traceability schemes; expanding a consolidated global 
record of authorized tuna vessels for the five RFMOs. 
 
Reduce ecosystem impacts: supporting the collaboration between WCPFC and IATTC to 
develop integrated and consistent management plans for sharks; supporting, exploring 
and disseminating mitigation techniques for seabird mortality, including the development 
of a global portal to access information success of various techniques. 
701. The Tuna Project principles are:  
 
to facilitate global collaboration between RFMOs, in the spirit of the Kobe process and 
the joint work of the t-RFMO Secretariats. 
 
to facilitate and accelerate existing processes in the t-RFMOs consistent with the Tuna 
Project’s objectives. 
 
not to interfere with or duplicate existing efforts. 
 
To leave implementation to the partners, whenever possible. 
702. The Tuna Project focuses on global benefits, even when activities are regional or national. 
The Kobe process has been meeting for more than ten years. There are two global working 
groups seeking global common ground which were left orphaned. This project can 
reinvigorate this technical side and facilitate and accelerate existing processes. Mr 
Anganuzzi encouraged WCPFC to identify how the Tuna Project can help with ideas and 
processes decided in WCPFC with the Project can support. The project leaves 
implementation up to partners, like WCPFC, because the partners know what needs to be 
done. Mr Anganuzzi finished by noting that collaboration is the key to the project. 
703. The Interim-Executive Director thanked Mr Anganuzzi on behalf of the Secretariat, 
including for the potential offer of support towards the MOW process.  
100 
 
12.3 WPEA SM Project 
704. Dr SungKwon Soh, WCPFC Science Manager and West Pacific East Asia (WPEA) Project 
Manager, provided a briefing on the current status of the WPEA SM Project. After the 
success of the first GEF-funded WPEA Oceanic Fisheries Management Project, UNDP and 
GEF provided the second project called Sustainable Management of Highly Migratory Fish 
Stocks in the West Pacific and East Asian Seas, which commenced on 28 October 2014 for 
three years. The Project Inception Workshop was held in Da Nang, Vietnam, from 4-5 
November 2014. The objective of the project is to improve the management of highly 
migratory fish stocks in the WCPF Convention Area by strengthening national capacities 
and participation of Indonesia, Philippines and Vietnam in WCPFC activities. Key 
activities include fishery data collection and sub-regional stock assessments, addressing 
climate change-related issues, and the ecosystem approach to fisheries management. The 
Science Manager manages this project through WCPFC’s in-kind contribution, assisted by 
national project coordinators and WCPFC staff. 
705. Indonesia, along with the Philippines and Vietnam, receives assistance from this project, 
which has delivered benefits in capacity building and institutional strengthening in 
particular. Collaboration between this project and a national initiative allowed Indonesia to 
finalize its National Tuna Management Plan, launched by the Indonesian government in 
November 2014 during the Bali Tuna Conference. In order to secure support for effective 
implementation of this plan and to strengthen Indonesia’s contribution to global sustainable 
tuna management practices, Indonesia will hold the Bali Tuna Conference every two years 
and invite WCPFC members to take part. Indonesia advised that its average annual catch 
2005-2012 was around 1.1 million metric ton per year, composed of 45% tuna and 55% 
neritic tuna. Around 76% was taken from Indonesian archipelagic waters and 24% was 
taken from its EEZ plus a small portion from high seas. Indonesia looked forward to 
WCPFC’s support for another three years. 
706. Vietnam expressed gratitude for the Commission’s support to improve its capacity 
including information sharing, and looked forward to participating in the coming project. 
707. The Philippines also extended its gratitude for the WPEA project and joined Vietnam and 
Indonesia in requesting the Commission to support the continuation of this project. 
12.4 Election of officers 
708. The Commission nominated and elected the following officer bearers of the WCPFC: 
 
WCPFC Chair – Rhea Moss-Christian (RMI).  
 
WCPFC Vice-Chair – Russell Smith (USA) 
 
SC Chair – Ludwig Kumoru (PNG) 
 
SC Vice-Chair - no nominations 
 
NC Chair – Masanori Miyahara (Japan) 
 
NC Vice-Chair – Mike Tosatto (USA) 
 
TCC Chair – Alexa Cole (USA) 
 
TCC Vice-Chair – Joanna Anderson (NZ) 
 
IWG-ROP Chair – Ray Clarke (USA) 
101 
 
 
FAC Co-Chair – Joyce Ah Leong (Samoa) 
 
EmandEr Working Group Chair – Kerry Smith (Australia) 
 
FAD Management Options Working Group Chair – Brian Kumasi (PNG) 
 
FAD Management Options Working Group Vice-Chair – Ray Clarke (USA) 
709. Upon the election of Ms Rhea Moss-Christian, the Chair remarked that this is the first time 
that both the Chair and the Executive Director of the WCPFC are both from SIDS. 
710. Some CCMs asked the Chair to clarify the arrangements in place to allow for his early 
departure on the afternoon of Friday 5 December 2014, and noted Rule 10 of the Rules of 
Procedure which provided for voting in a Vice-Chair for the unexpired term.  
711. The Chair advised that a Vice-Chair could be elected to replace Matt Hooper whose term 
does not expire until the end of WCPFC11. 
712. WCPFC11 elected Ms Rhea Moss-Christian (RMI) to be Vice Chair for the unexpired 
term of the former Vice-Chair (which was due to expire at the end of WCPFC11), and 
in this capacity Ms Moss-Christian chaired the meeting from 3:25pm until WCPFC11 
closed at 6:00pm on 5 December 2014. 
713. In order to meet travel obligations, Dr Charles Karnella left the chair at 3:25pm on the final 
day of the meeting. The Chair made some kind remarks upon his departure, saying that he 
very much appreciated the work of the Secretariat staff and expressed his thanks to them, 
noting that they take great care of the Commission and he will miss them and all WCPFC 
participants. The Chair wished the Commission luck and thanked delegates, noting that the 
issues WCPFC faces are difficult but he has confidence they will find the best way to 
perpetuate the WCPO’s fish stocks.  
714. The Interim-Executive Director sincerely thanked the Chair and remarked that the 
Secretariat very much appreciated his leadership, particularly for stepping into a gap left 
when the former Executive Director, Professor Glenn Hurry, left. The Interim-Executive 
Director commented that it had been a challenging meeting, and no doubt there were some 
disappointments. But there were a number of positive outcomes, including the 
commencement of an important dialogue amongst all CCMs through the Disproportionate 
Burden Workshop.  
715. Although it had been a difficult week, PNG expressed appreciation, on behalf of all CCMs, 
for the Chair’s efforts at WCPFC11 and as Chair, a position from which Dr Karnella was 
stepping down. 
12.5 Future meetings 
716. WCPFC11 agreed that: 
 
SC11 will be held in Pohnpei, FSM from Wednesday 5 August to Thursday 13 
August 2015.  
 
NC11 will be held in Japan in early September 2015, with a specific date and place 
to be determined. 
102 
 
 
TCC11 will be held in Pohnpei, FSM from Wednesday 23 to Tuesday 29 September 
2015. 
 
WCPFC12 will be held in Bali, Indonesia from Thursday 3 – Tuesday 8 December 
2015. As this period includes a weekend (giving delegates one free day) there will be 
a supplementary budgetary implication of around USD$8,000. 
 
717. The Vice-Chair noted that details of other meetings to be held in association with various 
subsidiary bodies and, as appropriate, intersessional working groups in 2015 will be 
finalised intersessionally, with the Secretariat sending out Circulars with proposed dates 
and venues. 
 
AGENDA  ITEM  13  -  OTHER MATTERS 
13.1 Progress on the Performance Review of the Commission 
718. The Interim-Executive Director noted that WCPFC10 tasked the Executive Director to 
revise the Performance Review matrix (contained in WCPFC10-2013-14) and to present 
the revised matrix to WCPFC11 (WCPFC11-2014-IP07). This was circulated to CCMs as 
WCPFC Circular 2013/128 (dated 20th December 2013).  
719. There was no discussion of this item. 
13.2 Strategic Plan 
720. The Interim-Executive Director noted that at WCPFC9, the Commission accepted a 
recommendation from the FAC that the discussions about the Strategic Plan take place at 
the Commission rather than FAC. While the Commission discussed the Strategic Plan at 
WCPFC10, there were no agreed outcomes.  
721. There was no discussion on this item. 
13.3 Ad hoc task group – data (AHTG-Data) 
722. The Vice-Chair asked whether the Commission wanted to elect a Chair for this group and 
restart its work, or whether there were any suggestions on a work plan.  
723. There was no discussion on this item. 
13.4 Kobe process questionnaire 
724. The Interim-Executive Director briefly introduced WCPFC11-2014-IP13, a questionnaire 
developed by the Kobe steering committee for each tuna RFMO to review and provide 
comments. The Interim-Executive Director suggested the Commission note the paper and 
set a tentative date of 15 February 2015 for comments to the Secretariat, which will collate 
and provide a revised or updated version to the Kobe committee. 
725. Russell Smith (USA), head of the Kobe steering committee, explained that the 
questionnaire was a tool developed to identify the extent to which each of the tuna RFMOs 
103 
 
has addressed the recommendations that were adopted at the three Kobe meetings. It lists 
the recommendations against the five tuna RFMOs and tracks whether that 
recommendation has been implemented, for further review and comparison. Mr Smith 
noted that it was a useful tool to identify what WCPFC has done and what others have done 
and perhaps learn from them or identify mentors. 
726. WCPFC11 noted the Kobe process questionnaire (WCPFC11-2014-IP13) and 
tentative date of 15 February 2015 for CCM comments to be provided to the 
Secretariat. 
 
AGENDA  ITEM  14  -  SUMMARY REPORT 
727. The Commission will adopt a Summary Report of its Eleventh Regular Session out of 
session, as per its usual practice. The Secretariat will advise CCMs of the draft Summary 
Report and arrangements for finalising the Summary Report by Circular. 
  
AGENDA  ITEM  15  -  CLOSE OF MEETING 
728. Speaking on behalf of NGOs, WWF stated that, despite best efforts, meaningful progress in 
WCPFC is at a virtual standstill, with virtually no meaningful substantive decisions taken: 
no new tropical tuna measure, no agreement on South Pacific albacore, no new compliance 
regime, to even agree to a plan to develop a plan to develop fundamental harvest strategies 
appeared to be too much of a commitment. These organisations thought it possible there 
was no hope for this process. Noting that the Commission adopted the Pacific bluefin 
CMM, WWF suggested that if it takes driving a stock down to less than 4%, the 
Commission should forego future meeting costs and transfer that money to SPC – until 
then participants are wasting time. Bilateral and multilateral meetings must take place 
before this Commission meeting comes together, to collaborate and cooperate in order to 
make progress at the meetings. WWF stated that the Commission has a collective 
responsibility to the world, the people of this region and the stocks on which they depend. 
729. Samoa confirmed its willingness to host future Commission meetings, perhaps as early as 
2016. Samoa thanked participants on behalf of the government of Samoa and the people of 
Samoa and wished them a safe trip home. Samoa thanked the Vice-Chair for her work. 
730. The Vice-Chair thanked Samoa for its offer to host future meetings. 
731. The Hon. Elisala Pita, Tuvalu Minister for Natural Resources, thanked the Secretariat and 
the government of Samoa for their excellent arrangements for the meeting and hospitality. 
The Honourable Minister noted that Article 30 of the Convention requires that 
management measures should not impose a disproportionate burden on SIDS, yet there is 
still a debate about it, what it means, how it can be measured and how Article 30 can be 
operationalised. Distant water fishing nations continue to hold the view that the 
disproportionate burden isn’t real. Others, like Japan, try to apply it to their own countries. 
In Tuvalu’s case it is very real and can be illustrated by the FAD closure to reduce bycatch 
of bigeye tuna. Fishing on FADs is very profitable, however the current mechanism creates 
a disproportionate burden for Tuvalu, which is currently losing about USD2 million due to 
this FAD closure a year. Although Tuvalu and other SIDS accepted this FAD restriction, it 
is not working. In reality there is no significant reduction in longline catches as a result of 
104 
 
the FAD closure. Other arrangements impose a disproportionate burden, such as fishing 
capacity restrictions so SIDS can’t expand their domestic fleets, burdensome reporting 
requirements, multiple and concurrent meetings which small delegations struggle to meet. 
The decisions made by the Commission more and more do not favour SIDS. The 
Honourable Minister hoped that during the next meeting things go forward in a partnership, 
and accommodate everybody’s interests.  
732. Indonesia expressed gratitude to the government of Samoa for hosting the meeting with 
such excellent facilities. This CCM also thanked the Chair, Vice-Chair and the Secretariat 
staff for the meeting arrangements and distinguished delegations from member counties for 
their partnership and collaboration at WCPFC11. As the hosting country of the 12th 
Regular Session, Indonesia looked forward to seeing participants in Bali. 
733. The Philippines expressed their thanks and noted that in Samoa they have very much felt at 
home, noting this was not surprising given that their understanding that there are ancestral 
linkages between the Samoan people with the Philippines, Malaysia and Indonesia region. 
734. The Interim-Executive Director expressed her gratitude to the following people: 
Government of Samoa as hosts of WCPFC11, for providing the excellent facilities and for 
the opening function, with a special thanks to Faalavaau Perina Sila, the Ministry of 
Fisheries and Ministry of Foreign Affairs staff, Police, Security and Drivers, particularly 
Fale who drove for the WCPFC Secretariat; and the staff of the Fale’ata Sports Complex, 
including Ronnie and the multimedia team and IT support from Malua, James and Fetu. 
The Interim-Executive Director thanked the outgoing Chair, Dr Charles Karnella, 
particularly for his support to the Secretariat during the interim period. She thanked the 
Secretariat staff in Apia, SPC-OFP staff and rapporteur by name. She congratulated the 
incoming Chair, and noted that the Secretariat looked forward to working with her in this 
new capacity. The Interim-Executive Director congratulated the newly appointed 
Executive Director, Mr Feleti Teo, and noted that the Secretariat staff looked forward to 
welcoming him and his family to Pohnpei in March 2015. The Interim-Executive Director 
concluded her remarks with two Samoan salutations: Fa’afetai tele and Soifua.  
735. The Vice-Chair echoed these words of thanks, especially to the Secretariat for their hard 
work. The Vice-Chair thanked delegates for entrusting the end of the meeting to her, and 
the future meetings she will chair. She looked forward to the Commission meeting next 
year before wishing participants a safe journey home. 
736. The meeting closed at 6:00pm on Friday 5 December 2014.               
 
