The Commission for the Conservation and Management of 
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean 
 
 
Sixteenth Regular Session of the Commission 
Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea 
5–11 December 2019 
  
  
SUMMARY REPORT  
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 1 —  OPENING OF MEETING  
1. 
The sixteenth Regular Session of the Commission for the Conservation and Management of Highly 
Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPFC16) took place from 5–11 
December 2019 in Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea (PNG).  
2. 
The following Members and Participating Territories attended WCPFC16: American Samoa, 
Australia, Canada, the People’s Republic of China,  the Cook Islands, the European Union (EU), the 
Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), Fiji, France, French Polynesia, Indonesia, Japan, Kiribati, the 
Republic of Korea, the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI), Nauru, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Niue, 
Palau, Papua New Guinea (PNG), the Philippines, Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Chinese Taipei, Tokelau, 
Tonga, Tuvalu, the United States of America (USA) and Vanuatu.  
3. 
The following non-party countries attended WCPFC16 as Cooperating Non-Members (CNMs): 
Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Nicaragua, Panama, Thailand and Vietnam.  
4. 
The following non-Party State observers attended WCPFC16: Curaçao.  
5. 
Observers from the following intergovernmental organizations attended WCPFC16: African, 
Caribbean and Pacific Group of States; Agreement for the Conservation of Albatross and Petrels (ACAP); 
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO), North Pacific Fisheries Commission 
(NPFC); Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA); Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS); Parties 
to the Nauru Agreement (PNA); Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) and The World Bank. 
6. 
Observers from the following non-governmental organizations (NGOs) attended WCPFC16: 
American Tunaboat Association, Australian National Centre for Ocean Resources and Security (ANCORS), 
Conservation International, International Environmental Law Project (IELP), International Pole and Line 
Foundation (IPNLF), Marine Stewardship Council, Pew Charitable Trusts, Seafood Legacy, The Ocean 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
2  
  
Foundation (TOF), World Tuna Purse Seine Organisation (WTPO) and World Wide Fund for Nature 
(WWF). 
7. 
A full list of all participants is provided in Attachment A. 
8. 
The Reverend Tony Dalaka offered a prayer. 
9. 
The WCPFC Executive Director, Feleti P Teo, OBE in his welcoming remarks welcomed 
participants to the opening ceremony of WCPFC16. He extended, on behalf of the WCPFC and all delegates, 
appreciation and gratitude for the attendance at the meeting of the Honourable James Marape, Prime 
Minister of the Independent State of Papua New Guinea and looked forward to the prime Minister’s address 
and insights. The Executive Director thanked the government and people of PNG for the warmth of their 
welcome and for hosting WCPFC16, and acknowledged with gratitude PNG’s Minister for Fisheries, the 
Hon. Dr. Lino Tom and his officials and staff for the excellent meeting arrangements. He also acknowledged 
the presence of other ministers of fisheries from member states of the Commission, particularly Pacific 
Island developing states, and noted that their continued attendance was sending a powerful message 
regarding the serious concern of Pacific Island states regarding the health and sustainability of tuna and 
other highly migratory fish stocks in the western and central Pacific Ocean (WCPO). He further noted that 
the Pacific has the world’s richest tuna resources and production, contributing over half of global tuna catch 
in 2018. He also highlighted that all the key commercial tuna stocks in the WCPF Convention Area are 
assessed as being managed and maintained above agreed sustainable levels, an accomplishment not matched 
in any other region. He cautioned, however, that there was a temptation to be complacent and less vigilant 
with regard to conservation efforts, and reminded CCMs that the WCPFC is first and foremost a 
conservation organisation, which must have as its central focus the biological sustainability of the fish 
stocks, with all other considerations and interests — whether financial, economic or commercial — 
remaining subservient to that central focus. The Executive Director’s full remarks are attached as 
Attachment B. 
10. 
The Commission Chair, Ms. Jung-re Riley Kim, welcomed the Prime Minister of PNG, as well as 
honourable ministers, delegates, representatives, and attendees to WCPFC16. She expressed her gratitude 
to the government of PNG, remarking on the professionalism and efficiency which the government of PNG 
had demonstrated as host of the WCPFC. She also remarked in particular the significance of the attendance 
by the Prime Minister of PNG at the opening of WCPFC16. She stated her immense pleasure and honour to 
lead the discussions that would contribute to shaping the future of resource conservation and management 
in the WCPO. The Chair noted that critical issues facing WCPFC16 included making further progress on 
harvest strategies; improving the Compliance Monitoring Scheme (CMS), which is set to expire in 2019; 
discussing and producing a workplan to develop high seas purse seine catch or effort limits and longline 
bigeye limits and relevant allocations as set out in the WCPFC’s tropical tuna measure; and discussing ways 
to ensure effective conservation and management of South Pacific albacore. She drew particular attention 
to the harvest strategy, which is a core objective of the Commission, and stated that WCPFC15 agreed on a 
6-day annual meeting for WCPFC16 to enable the Commission to move forward with discussions and 
development of a harvest strategy in accordance with Conservation and Management Measure (CMM) 
2014-06, and noted her expectation that WCPFC16 would make meaningful progress in that regard. She 
highlighted the significant contribution by SPC-OFP in providing science and data inputs into this work, 
and their innovative efforts and initiatives for engaging with and building the capacity of CCMs with respect 
to harvest strategies. She also noted the importance of giving consideration to the special requirements of 
small island developing states (SIDS) and appreciated the efforts by all CCMs to uphold this important 
principle. The Chair offered special thanks to the Executive Director and his team for their support in 
preparation for WCPFC16; and thanked the Commission Vice Chair, and chairs and vice chairs of the 
subsidiary bodies of the Commission for their hard work and leadership. She also offered congratulations to 
FFA members on their 40th anniversary. The Chair closed by expressing thanks and acknowledgement to 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
3  
  
the former WCPFC Chair Ms. Rhea Moss-Christian, who she said led the Commission with dedication, 
focus and stewardship; the Chair emphasized her intention to carry on that legacy. The WCPFC Chair’s full 
remarks are attached as Attachment C.  
11. 
The Honourable James Marape, MP, Prime Minister of the Independent State of Papua New Guinea, 
gave the keynote opening address. On behalf of his government and the people of PNG he extended a very 
warm welcome to his country, which he noted is a land of many cultures, tradition and languages, with over 
8 million people, 800 languages and 1000 tribes. He observed that PNG was not new to United Nations 
(UN) processes, recalling that PNG hosted a PrepCom conference in Madang preceding the first WCPFC 
conference. He recalled the importance of UN Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 14 and the declaration 
by Pacific Island Forum Leaders of a Blue Pacific, in recognition of the region’s shared stewardship of the 
Pacific. He observed that the WCPO contains the world’s most productive tuna fisheries, which are unique 
in that they occur mostly under national jurisdiction, largely within the exclusive economic zones (EEZs) 
of Pacific SIDS, where about half of the global supply of skipjack is caught. He highlighted that there are 
issues and challenges affecting the sustainability of tuna and other highly migratory stocks in the WCPO, 
noting in particular illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing, with its far-reaching consequences 
for long-term sustainable fisheries management. Among the other pressing issues facing WCPFC16 he 
mentioned the need to develop harvest strategies for key commercial tuna species; controlling high seas 
fishing effort and transhipment; the special requirements for SIDS; and an effective CMS. However, he 
observed WCPFC’s actions have helped ensure that all major tuna stocks in the WCPF Convention Area 
are currently at sustainable levels, which is not the case in any other regional fisheries management 
organization (RFMO). He stated the need for all CCMs to work together in true partnership to ensure 
WCPFC’s fish stocks remain healthy, noting PNG’s commitment in that endeavour, and his government’s 
vision to encourage growth through onshore and downstream processing in the fisheries sector in the region, 
providing jobs, livelihoods, foreign exchange and food security, with the goal of seeing the region 
recognized in the global market as the home of sustainable fishing and catch. He also called upon WCPFC 
to address climate change and its impact on the low-lying islands of the Pacific, its waters, and fish stocks; 
the growing impacts of pollution from plastics and marine debris; harmful fisheries subsidies that impacting 
fragile Pacific economies; and social accountability standards for those employed be fisheries. He stated 
that such issues are real for Pacific peoples, and they must be properly managed. He expressed confidence 
that WCPFC’s deliberations would strengthen existing measures and reach consensus on adoption of new 
CMMs, noting the reality that the Pacific islands could not move on to new regions if they soiled their 
resources. He wished participants success in their deliberations and declared the 16th Annual Regular 
Session of the WCPFC open. The Prime Minister’s full remarks are attached as Attachment D.  
1.1 
Adoption of Agenda  
12. 
The Chair presented the revised Provisional Agenda (WCPFC16-2019-01) for consideration and 
adoption of the Commission. She noted the addition of agenda Item 13.2A, as discussed at the Heads of 
Delegation meeting. 
13. 
The Agenda was adopted (Attachment E*). 
 
1.2 
Statements from Members and Participating Territories  
14. 
The Hon. Semi Koroilavesau, Minister for Fisheries of Fiji, acknowledged the Prime Minister of 
PNG for his address, and gave tribute to the traditional owners of Papua New Guinea for their hospitality. 
He stressed that the shared ocean and its resources formed an identity that had sustained Pacific Islanders 
for generations, and that Fiji and its Pacific Island neighbours were thus passionate about voicing their 
concerns during WCPFC meetings. He reviewed several items of concern to Fiji:  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
4  
  
i. 
Finalising the preferred South Pacific albacore target reference point (TRP), with a focus on an 
overall hard limit split between the high seas and EEZs, and implementing overall hard limits that 
recognise zone-based management, EEZ limits, data collection and reporting requirements until a 
harvest strategy is agreed upon;  
ii. Developing control measures on effort in the high seas through limits and an allocation framework 
for purse seine and longline fisheries;  
iii. Improving current coverage and more effectively implementing broader monitoring, control and 
surveillance (MCS) priorities; 
iv. Recognising the adverse impacts of climate change in the WCPO, and collectively taking stronger 
action on climate change in the form of better science, robust measures that help mitigate impacts of 
climate change, and a general reduction of the WCPFC’s carbon footprint; and  
v. Recognising the limitations of SIDS and what needs to be undertaken to ensure that CMMs are not 
burdensome and are passed through consensus. 
 
15. 
The Hon. Dennis P. Momotaro, Minister of Natural Resources and Commerce, and Chairman of the 
Marshall Islands Marine Resources Authority, expressed gratitude for the excellent hosting of the meetings, 
and for the Prime Minister’s address. He also congratulated the WCPFC Chair for her new role, and 
acknowledged the prior Chair, Ms. Rhea Moss-Christian. He addressed three key issues, in addition to 
supporting the comments raised by Fiji:  
i. 
the ongoing challenges of IUU fishing, and work toward achieving an IUU-free Pacific by 2023; 
ii. the immediate need to address marine pollution through effective implementation of CMM 2017-04; 
and 
iii. the response to the impacts of climate change, as expressed in WCPFC16-2019-DP04. 
 
16. 
The Hon. Esa Sharon-Mona Ainu’u (Niue) wished the Chair all the best in her leadership; 
acknowledged the Vice Chair of WCPFC, Dr Josie Tamate, from Niue; and expressed appreciation and 
thanks to Ms. Rhea Moss Christian for her dedication and hard work during her term as Chair of WCPFC. 
She thanked the host government of PNG for the warm hospitality accorded to her delegation and stated that 
her presence was an indication of Niue’s continual commitment to the management and sustainable 
development of its vital fisheries. She stressed the responsibility CCMs have to ensure the tuna resources in 
the WCPO are managed sustainably. She noted three particular concerns Niue would focus on at WCPFC16:  
i. 
Climate change, which she stated was an existential threat to the region, and directly threatens Pacific 
livelihoods, security and wellbeing. She stated that action on climate change needs to be a primary 
concern in all areas and called on WCPFC to adopt the FFA resolution that would be introduced;  
ii. The need to agree and implement a process and workplan to establish limits and allocations for high 
seas purse seine and longline fisheries that specifically recognizes the special circumstances of SIDs, 
and the rights of SIDs to develop fisheries in the high seas; and 
iii. The South Pacific albacore roadmap, as albacore is the key species of interest for Niue’s EEZ.  
 
She stated that she looked forward to cooperating with Niue’s regional partners to strengthen management 
of the high seas in order to cater for future generations. 
 
17. 
The Hon. Lino Tom, Minister for Fisheries and Marine Resources, PNG, welcomed all delegations 
to PNG, congratulated the Chair of WCPFC, and looked forward to working with her as chair. He noted that 
measures adopted by the Commission had resulted in demonstrated sustainable management of tuna and 
other highly migratory fish stocks in the WCPO, and that the Commission’s legacy was achieving 
cooperation between the competing interests of its various members. He mentioned some significant issues 
on the agenda, including high seas allocation, the harvest strategy, CMS, and climate change. He stated that 
the outcomes of the discussions should continue to strengthen and enhance existing management regimes, 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
5  
  
in particular CMMs adopted for the high seas. He referenced the need to ensure that measures adopted did 
not have a disproportionate impact on SIDS and the need to adopt a skipjack TRP and noted with concern 
the approach being taken by the Commission regarding harvest strategies. He stressed the importance of 
addressing climate change, and of ensuring the need to comply with and be vigilant in maintaining the 
integrity of the Commission’s CMMs.  
18. 
The Hon. Tetabo Nakara, Minister of Fisheries and Marine Resources Development, Kiribati, 
offered warm gratitude to the government and people of PNG for hosting WCPFC16, and thanked the 
Secretariat and NFA for their support for WCPFC16. He acknowledged Commission members in 
recognizing Kiribati’s unfortunate situation with three non-contiguous EEZs across vast areas of high seas, 
and the accommodations made to Kiribati in recognition of this. He noted the dependence of Kiribati on the 
region’s shared tuna stocks and noted the need to honour and respect each other’s interest and sovereignty, 
in a spirit of good faith and cooperation. He noted that the success of the WCPFC’s CMMs was encouraging, 
while calling for more work on the science and economics of the fisheries to enable informed and active 
participation in decision-making. He also asked that developed CCMs recognise the Third Implementing 
Arrangement of the Parties to the Nauru Agreement, which he stated was embedded in the CMM for tropical 
tunas, and thus form part of the institutional structure of tuna management in the WCPO. 
19. 
The Hon. Minute Alapati Taupo, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Fisheries and Trade of 
Tuvalu, thanked the government and people of PNG for the excellent hospitality and courtesy accorded to 
their delegation, and congratulated the Chair, while assuring her that his delegation would support and work 
with her in her tenure as chair of WCPFC. He also conveyed thanks and congratulations to the outgoing 
Chair, Ms Rhea Moss Christian. On behalf of the government of Tuvalu he noted the following priorities.  
i. 
Climate change, which he described as threatening the very survival of Tuvalu. Tuvalu strongly 
supported the views expressed by FFA member countries in WCPFC16-2019-DP04, and urged 
WCPFC members to work towards effective and equitable solutions to address climate change 
impacts on the management of fisheries resources in this region;  
ii. The review of the TRP for skipjack, which accounts for about 90% of the commercial tuna catches 
in Tuvalu’s waters. He noted Tuvalu favours a TRP that will maintain stocks and effort at or near 
2012 levels. He also addressed the need to reach agreement on TRPs for yellowfin and bigeye, while 
suggesting a better understanding of the practical and economic impacts on Tuvalu’s multi-species 
fisheries was needed for setting TRPs for these tunas, observing that experience with the skipjack 
TRP also showed the need for caution;  
iii. The process for setting limits for high seas purse seine and longline fisheries, while not re-opening 
the effective systems that PNA members have in place to manage the fisheries in their EEZs; and  
iv. Concerns regarding the definition FADs. He noted that although Tuvalu would benefit from relaxing 
the FAD definition as proposed by two CCMs, it opposed it at WCPFC15 because of concerns over 
the impact on bigeye tuna stocks. Tuvalu also stated concern that the new exemption for “small items 
of garbage”, which was trialled in 2019, caused confusion for Tuvaluan observers. While always 
willing to consider measures to improve FAD management, Tuvalu was not inclined to agree to 
simply extend the arrangement.  
He looked forward to further discussion on the issues before the Commission and stated his hope that CCMs 
could reach consensus. He closed by expressing sincere sympathies and condolences to the countries 
affected by the recent outbreak of measles which caused sad and unexpected casualties.  
20. 
Mr. Eugene Pangelinan, Executive Director of FSM’s National Oceanic Resource Management 
Authority, and Chair of the Forum Fisheries Committee (FFC), spoke on behalf of the 17 members of FFA. 
He congratulated the Commission Chair, stating that she had the full support of the FFA membership, and 
again thanked the outgoing Chair, Ms. Rhea Moss-Christian for her past leadership. He thanked the PNG 
government for hosting the meeting and NFA for the excellent arrangements. He stated that at their 2019 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
6  
  
annual meeting Pacific Island Forum Leaders highlighted that climate change is the single greatest threat to 
the livelihoods, security and wellbeing of the people of the Pacific, and reaffirmed their commitment to 
progress the implementation of the Paris Agreement. He stated that it is an unprecedented global challenge 
— the impacts of climate change are particularly severe in Pacific Island countries, where for many the 
threat posed by climate change is existential. He stated that climate change places the benefits to Pacific 
SIDS from the region’s tuna fisheries at great risk; for many countries, tuna fisheries are their most critical 
renewable resource, one that provides essential social, cultural and economic benefits, and tuna stocks are 
increasingly important for food security in the region and essential for the achievement of all SDGs by 
Pacific Island countries. He stated that as outlined in WCPFC16-2019-DP04, FFA members called on 
WCPFC to take stronger action on climate change, and that FFA members’ broader priorities for WCPFC16 
were outlined in WCPFC16-2019-DP01 and other delegation papers. He closed by highlighting several 
other issues of concern to FFA members: 
i. 
The lack of thought in the CMM 2013-06 assessments on the impacts of new proposals on SIDS, 
noting the need for better advance consultation between proponents of measures and SIDS CCMs;  
ii. The status of certain stocks, with North Pacific striped marlin being the most critical, noting that 
management of these stocks must be a priority; and 
iii. The need to resolve some longstanding issues, including the consolidated shark CMM. 
 
21. 
France stated that their primary concern at WCPFC16 was the fight against IUU fishing, which 
requires continued improvement. It referred to enforcement actions taken by French authorities, stating that 
France will maintain the highest level of inspections possible near New Caledonia, French Polynesia, and 
Wallis and Futuna. France looked forward to efforts to increase Port State control and strengthen CMM 
2017-02 (Conservation and Management Measure on Minimum Standards for Port State Measures). As of 
1 January 2020, France stated it will apply the International Maritime Organization (IMO) Port State 
measures in Papeete. France stated it would support adoption of a CMM ensuring transhipment is conducted 
in port instead of at sea, and supported cooperation with other tuna (t)-RFMOs, especially with regard to 
inspections at sea and in port.  
22. 
Mr. Va’amua Henry Sesepasara, Director of the Department of Marine and Wildlife Resources in 
American Samoa stated that, like Fiji, American Samoa identifies very closely with tuna — its culture and 
economy are tuna dependent, and American Samoa therefore supports the effective management of the tuna 
resources under the stewardship of the Commission. He looked forward to discussing all of the potentially 
contentious management issues such as high seas allocations, TRPs and harvest strategies, reflecting that, 
thanks to the good work of the Commission, tropical tunas in the WCPO are in good condition, but observed 
that the same cannot be said for tuna-dependent economies. He stated that there was simply too much tuna 
being caught, and the oversupply of purse seine-caught tuna had reduced the value of tuna for canning, 
noting that the current tuna fishery was simply not economically sustainable for any CCM. Therefore, like 
the albacore fishery, American Samoa believed economic considerations should be included when 
developing management measures for the purse seine tuna fishery. 
1.3 
Meeting Arrangements  
23. 
The Commission reviewed the meeting arrangements, the indicative meeting schedule, and 
confirmed decisions made at the Heads of Delegation meeting held on 4 December.  
1.3.1 
Establishment of small working groups  
24. 
 The Commission agreed to progress work on specific issues through the following small working 
groups: (i) CNM SWG, led by Nauru; (ii) SWG to finalise the CMR, led by the TCC Chair (RMI); (iii) , 
SWG to consider the E-Monitoring Concept Paper, led by ERandEM WG  Chair (Australia); (iv) Review 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
7  
  
of Transhipment CMM IWG terms of reference, led by IWG Cho-Chairs (RMI and USA); (v) Draft CMM 
for Sharks, led by the Shark IWG Chair (Japan); (vi) Considering enhancements to the CMM on CMS in 
accordance with the future work in Section IX of CMM 2018-07, led by the TCC Vice Chair (Canada); (vii) 
SWG on the list of obligations to be assessed by the CMS in 2020, led by the WCPFC Vice-Chair (Niue); 
(viii) Harvest Strategy Workplan SWG, led by Australia; and (ix) SWG to develop a terms of reference for 
a workshop on high seas purse seine effort limits and bigeye longline limit allocation, led by Papua New 
Guinea.  
AGENDA ITEM 2  — ANNUAL REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR  
25. 
The Executive Director introduced WCPFC16-2019-04: 2019 Annual Report of the Executive 
Director, which is a requirement under Rule 13 of the Commission’s Rules of Procedure. He indicated that 
if the Corporate Plan was approved, future annual reports would address the requirements of that plan. He 
stated that WCPFC15 key outcomes included approval for the continuation of the tropical tuna CMM, a 
TRP for South Pacific Albacore, and bycatch CMMs (for seabirds, turtles, etc). He observed that the lack 
of agreement regarding a science–management dialogue resulted in a 6-day meeting for WCPFC16. The 
Executive Director reviewed the work of SC15, which was undertaken under four thematic areas, and 
thanked the theme conveners for their efforts on behalf of the Commission. He reminded CCMs that the 
WCPO catch totals 81% of the Pacific Ocean catch, and 51% of the global catch. The services of the SPC-
OFP supports the work of the SC, and he noted that the outcomes of their assessments would be addressed 
at WCPFC16. He reviewed the work of the NC during 2019, noting the joint activities undertaken with 
IATTC. He also reviewed the work by TCC15, which adopted a provisional CMR, while work on 
streamlining reporting requirements and development of audit points would continue into 2020. Terms of 
Reference (TORs) were adopted for the work of the transhipment review IWG, while the working groups 
addressing the flow of observer reports and electronic reporting and electronic monitoring were able to meet 
in the margins of TCC15. Institutional issues raised by the Executive Director included strategic planning; 
a summary of staffing matters; and financial and administrative arrangements, in particular, he highlighted 
the healthy financial status of the Commission as expressed in the unqualified auditor’s report. The 
Executive Director noted WCPFC’s trust funds and thanked the CCMs responsible for funding these (a list 
of voluntary contributions is provided in para 37 of his report). The Executive Director also noted the 
tremendous contributions made by SPC (scientific services provider), FFA (as Vessel Monitoring System 
[VMS] services provider), and ISC (scientific services provider to NC). The Executive Director also 
highlighted the relations of WCPFC with other organisations (including the UN and FAO, tuna and non-
tuna RFMOs, and other Pacific regional organisations) and touched on the ABNJ Common Oceans and 
WPEA projects. Among key future activities, he highlighted the harvest strategy development work, and 
work on the new tropical tuna CMM.  
26. 
FSM, on behalf of FFA members, thanked the Executive Director for the report, and noted that the 
Secretariat had tabled a draft Corporate Plan for consideration at WCPFC16, which they considered good 
progress, and looked forward to commenting on it later in the meeting. FFA members thanked the 
Commission for allocating an extra day at WCPFC16 to allow discussions on harvest strategies and noted 
with concern that Southwest Pacific striped marlin is likely overfished and that North Pacific striped marlin 
is overfished and subject to overfishing. FFA members encouraged all CCMs to take the required collective 
action to start rebuilding these stocks. FFA members also thanked the Secretariat staff that have moved on 
and welcomed new staff, noting that good staff are critical to supporting the work of the Commission. 
27. 
The Commission accepted the 2019 Annual Report of the Executive Director (WCPFC16-2019-
04). 
 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
8  
  
AGENDA ITEM 3 — MEMBERSHIP AND OTHER APPLICATIONS 
3.1 
Status of the Convention  
28. 
New Zealand, as the Depositary of the Convention on the Conservation and Management of Highly 
Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, presented WCPFC16-2019-05: Status of 
the Convention. It advised that since its last report in December 2018, New Zealand had not received 
notification of any instruments of ratification or accession to the Convention. 
29. 
The Commission noted the report on the Status of the Convention (WCPFC16-2019-05). 
 
3.2 
Update on Observer Status  
30. 
The Executive Director referred the meeting to WCPFC16-2019-06: List of Observers that 
provided the full list of observer delegations. The Executive Director noted that Curaçao sought CNM status 
for 2020, and observer status for WCPFC16, explaining Curaçao needed to be formerly invited as a non-
party state observer to attend WCPFC16. The Executive Director also explained that Rule 36 of the Rules 
of Procedure (regarding Observers) was adopted in 2018, but that issues with implementation of paragraph 
1(e) were raised at the Heads of Delegation meeting.  
31. 
The Commission accepted Curaçao as a Non-Party State Observer.  
32. 
The Commission agreed to exclude Inter-governmental Organisations from the application of 
Rule 36 (5) of the Commission Rules of Procedure and agreed to amend Rule 36(5) to omit the cross-
reference to subparagraph 36 (1 e).  
33. 
The Commission confirmed that the Secretariat should use 2017, 2018 and 2019 as the base years 
for the initial application for Rule 36 (5) of the Commission Rules of Procedure.  
34. 
The Commission noted the updated list of observers to the Commission (WCPFC16-2019-06). 
 
3.3 
Applications for Cooperating Non-Member (CNM) status  
35. 
The Commission considered applications for CNM status for 2020 in accordance with CMM 2009-
11, including recommendations from the TCC15. As outlined in WCPFC16-2019-07: Cooperating Non-
Member Requests for 2020, eight applications for CNM status were received in 2019 from Curaçao, 
Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Nicaragua, Panama, Thailand and Vietnam.  
36. 
Kiribati, on behalf of FFA members, stated that it is a privilege to fish and engage in related activities 
within the WCPO, and that renewal of CNM status was conditional upon full compliance with the national 
laws and regulations of any licensing CCM, and all WCPFC CMMs, and provisions of the WCPF 
Convention. FFA members stated that the Commission should consider the question of whether a failure to 
comply with established requirements should be rewarded with renewal of CNM status. They noted the 
difficulty in determining appropriate action when a CNM has been found non-compliant until “Actions in 
response to non-compliance” were progressed as part of the overall CMS. As identified by TCC15, issues 
of non-attendance (at least for the TCC and Commission meetings), late financial contributions, and 
compliance and data gaps were to be addressed at WCPFC16. FFA members sought guidance from the 
Secretariat on issues and information gaps identified at TCC15 and to be reported to the Commission before 
a decision to grant CNM status to an applicant is made. They noted that CNM applicants should at the least 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
9  
  
participate in the meetings of the Commission and the TCC and must be available to respond to any 
questions relating to their application, stating that the Commission and TCC could not receive information 
from a person who does not represent the CNM applicant, and that the Commission must remind CNMs that 
there is an expectation that CNMs participate actively to respond to queries and rectify issues in a timely 
manner. FFA members thanked all CNMs for payment of financial contributions. On the issue of late 
payment of financial contributions, TCC15 recommended that the Commission apply the same expectations 
regarding payment deadlines and outstanding payments that are applied to full members of the Commission. 
37. 
Solomon Islands, on behalf of FFA members, noted that certain CNM applicants were identified as 
non-compliant or priority non-compliant with respect to a number of CMMs during the CMS process in 
2019. Where a compliance issue is priority non-compliant, CNMs are required to provide an explanation as 
to how these repeated instances of non-compliance will be addressed and not repeated each year so that this 
can be critically assessed by the Commission in determining whether or not to grant CNM status to each 
applicant. The issue of non-compliance must be addressed before a decision is taken. With regards to 
Curaçao, FFA members requested they provide information on their compliance record in other RFMOs. 
38. 
The Compliance Manager noted that para. 10 of WCPFC16-2019-07 contained the additional 
information received by the Secretariat. 
39. 
The representative of Curaçao thanked the Commission for granting it non-party observer status for 
WCPFC16. Curaçao related that it is a member of ICCAT and has been a full member since 2014. Curaçao 
attended ICCAT’s last meeting, when only one item was notified (no information received regarding fishing 
in the EEZ of Curaçao). Curaçao indicated that no information had been received because no fishing licenses 
had been issued for Curaçao’s EEZ, and thus no data was provided. Curaçao stated it has been a member of 
SPRFMO for 2 years but was not fishing in that area. Regarding the Northeast Atlantic Fisheries 
Commission (of which Curaçao is a cooperating non-contracting party), Curaçao stated there were no 
compliance issues.  
40. 
Tuvalu, on behalf of FFA members, noted that considerations in the grant of participatory rights to 
a CNM are captured in paragraph 12 of the CNM CMM. Rights may also be reviewed in accordance with 
the measure. They noted that where a CNM has failed to comply with any of the CMMs, it “shall be deemed 
to have undermined the effectiveness of the conservation and management measures adopted by the 
Commission” (para. 15 CMM 2009-11). 
41. 
FSM sought clarification regarding the interest of Curaçao in the WCPFC area, noting that while 
there appears to be a focus on providing supporting services to fishing vessels, Curaçao also has fishing 
vessels. Curaçao stated that they do have purse seine vessels and trawlers operating in other areas and have 
six carrier vessels and two supply vessels flagged. Curaçao stated it has no intention of becoming engaged 
in fishing activities in the WCPF Convention Area and is only interested in conducting transhipment in ports 
within the Convention Area. Curaçao would seek to comply with all CMMs and CMS (e.g., with VMS) to 
align with the WCPFC Convention. 
42. 
The EU stated that they have formal dialogues on IUU fishing with some countries that are applying 
for CNM status and noted that some of these countries have been preidentified as non-cooperating with 
respect to fighting and preventing IUU fishing.  In this context, the EU also stated that despite the non-
compliance issues identified in the Compliance Monitoring Report, it would agree to accord this year CNM 
status to all countries applying for it.  However, the EU will not support the renewal of CNM status to these 
countries next year, unless they will achieve clear and concrete progress in addressing the shortcomings in 
compliance with WCPFC rules and in fighting IUU fishing.   
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
10  
  
43. 
The Commission agreed to accept the applications for CNM status in 2020 submitted by Curaçao, 
Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Nicaragua, Panama, Thailand, and Vietnam. 
44. 
The Chair noted that Ecuador was registered but not present at WCPFC16. Palau inquired why the 
Commission should entertain CNM applications if parties were not present. The Chair stated they would 
provide an update on Ecuador’s attendance at WCPFC16 and sought input from CCMs regarding the 
granting or renewal of CNM status to CNMs who were not present. The United States noted that CNM 
status had been granted by the Commission for 2020 through the preceding discussion, noting it was 
important to look at the rules for CNM applications. The United States suggested it might be possible to 
change the rules for consideration of future applications. RMI stated that it was hard to assess applications 
if representatives were not present, and that it was not inclined to support applications when representatives 
were absent. Japan agreed that more time should be taken to consider changing the CNM CMM. It agreed 
with the USA’s position, while observing that other RFMOs are not inclined to give CNM status if a 
representative is not present. Japan suggested one approach would be to give existing CNMs a warning but 
in the case of new applicant warnings would not be needed.  
45. 
Nauru stated that, as the chair of the CNM SWG, and in light of the preceding discussion, the SWG 
would not consider El Salvador’s non-attendance, and would only take up the matter of participatory rights 
for the approved CNMs.  
46. 
China requested that, to assist the SWG in its work, the Secretariat provide a reference paper 
regarding participatory rights that have been granted in the past.  
47. 
The SWG considering the CNM participatory rights made the following recommendations and 
observations:  
i. 
The SWG noted with appreciation the attendance and participation of Curaçao, Ecuador, Liberia, 
Nicaragua, Panama, Thailand, and Vietnam.  
ii. The SWG was made aware that El Salvador would be arriving the following day. The SWG delayed 
consideration of El Salvador’s participatory rights until they arrived.  
iii. The SWG agreed to recommend that the participatory rights of Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, 
Nicaragua, Panama, Thailand, and Vietnam remain the same in 2020 as they were in 2019.  
iv. Curaçao clarified for the SWG that they would only be seeking participation for carrier and bunker 
vessels in the WCPO. The SWG agreed to recommend that the participatory rights of Curaçao would 
be limited to the provision of carrier and bunker vessels.  
 
48. 
China inquired regarding supply vessels, noting that in other RFMOs this covered vessels deploying 
FADs to help purse seine vessels, and asked if that was the Curaçao’s intent. It asked for specific details 
regarding the vessels, and their number. The representative from Curaçao stated that it did not foresee 
deploying any supply vessels in the Convention area, and that it was comfortable with eliminating the 
reference if desired by the Commission. Curaçao stated that it has 6 carrier vessels.  
49. 
The Chair inquired of Liberia if any FAD deployment was planned, and the representative of Liberia 
stated that it was engaged only in transhipment activities.  
50. 
The Chair addressed the issue that had been raised by CCMs regarding non-attendance of CNMs at 
relevant meetings and the annual meeting. The Chair and Secretariat proposed changes to CMM 2009-11, 
in the form of a new para. 3(b) and an amendment to para 6. 
51. 
The Commission agreed to amend paragraph 3 and paragraph 6 of CMM 2009-11 to include 
consideration of the attendance by an applicant for CNM status at the TCC and Commission meetings 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
11  
  
where its application is considered, subject to the applicant being able to attend the meeting as an observer 
(Conservation and Management Measure 2019-01, Attachment F*). 
52. 
The Commission approved the applications for CNM status for 2020 from Curaçao, Ecuador, El 
Salvador, Liberia, Nicaragua, Panama, Thailand and Vietnam. 
 
53. 
Ecuador thanked the Commission for again approving Ecuador’s application as a CNM, a status it 
has been granted for more than 10 years. Ecuador stated that, along with other CNMs, it had been waiting 
for a long time for a legal, clear, fair and transparent procedure to become full WCPFC members. It recalled 
the discussion paper (WCPFC14-2017-DP18) presented by the United States to WCPFC14, which it stated 
could have represented a good starting point for dealing with the issue, but that the Commission expressed 
very little interest in changing the situation. The CNM application template was changed in 2015, asking 
applicant countries whether they had interest in becoming a full member. Ecuador stated it wondered why 
the change was made, if the information was not being used. Ecuador observed that it and most WCPFC 
members are members of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and the United 
Nations Fish Stocks Agreement (UNFSA), which are pillars of the legal international framework for oceans 
and fisheries, which stated that RFMOs shall not discriminate against any state or groups of states having a 
real interest in the fisheries concerned. Ecuador stated that attending annual Commission meetings year after 
year, asking WCPFC to address the issue, and not being listened to, undoubtedly constituted discrimination, 
and was a violation of UNCLOS and UNFSA. It noted this was quite different than what had happened 
following adoption of the new IATTC Convention (The Antigua Convention) in 2003, where several non-
EPO coastal states (e.g., China, Belize and Kiribati) became IATTC members without any barriers. Ecuador 
again encouraged the Commission to set up a transparent framework and conditions to allow CNM countries 
to become full members, and specifically asked the Commission to accept Ecuador as a full member. 
54. 
The EU supported Ecuador’s statement, noting that the Commission was failing to fully respect 
UNCLOS with respect to countries who have fishing interests in the Convention Area and wish to become 
a member, and stated that this could result in problems in the future that could lead to a trial in ITLOS.  
55. 
Nauru, on behalf of the PNA stated that they did not support the expansion of the Commission to 
include new members. PNA members joined the Commission with the understanding that the WCPFC is a 
closed Commission, which they stated is reflected in the Convention, where the Commission has a different 
and less open process for considering new members compared to some other commissions. The WCPF 
Convention provides that new members can only join by invitation, and that invitation has to be decided by 
consensus. Nauru stated that the process reflected the nature of the Commission, where over 85% of the 
catch was made in the waters of developing countries, especially SIDS, which are highly dependent on those 
resources. PNA members believe it is misleading to invite applicants for CNM status to indicate whether 
they are interested in becoming a member of the Commission. 
56. 
The United States stated that this was not a new issue, but one which had been previously debated 
at length. The United States confirmed it had tried previously to provide information to support a process 
by which new member applications may be considered. It stated it shared some of the concerns raised by 
the EU, stressing that Commission discussions should at least be consistent with the UNFSA, and looked 
forward to developing a way forward. The United States noted its concern was with the Commission’s lack 
of process which would at least enable respectful discussion of expressions of interest. The United States 
stressed it was not in a position to say that the Commission should be expanded, but that there should at 
least be a process in place to have that discussion.  
57. 
Palau stated that PNA members considered that the CNM process provided adequate opportunities 
for participation by countries that had not been engaged in the process of drawing up the Convention. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
12  
  
3.3.1 
Participatory rights of CNMs  
58. 
The Commission agreed to the following limits to be applied to the participatory rights of CNMs 
(Convention / CMM 2009-11): 
a. In accordance with the WCPF Convention and WCPFC conservation and management measures and 
resolutions, the following participatory rights apply to Cooperating Non- Members (CNMs) for fisheries 
in the high seas within the WCPFC Convention Area;  
b. In addition, unless otherwise specified below, CNMs may fish in waters under their national 
jurisdiction or other CCMs’ national jurisdiction, in accordance with appropriate bilateral arrangements;  
c. CNMs shall ensure vessels flying their flags comply with all provisions of the WCPF Convention and 
the WCPFC conservation and management measures. In addition, CNM vessels will be placed on the 
WCPFC Record of Fishing Vessels (WCPFC RFV);  
d. CCMs shall ensure that CNM fishing activities that are conducted in waters under their national 
jurisdiction in accordance with bilateral arrangements are consistent with all relevant conservation and 
management measures and provisions of the WCPF Convention; and  
e. Renewal of CNM status by the Commission will take into account compliance with the national laws 
and regulations of any licensing CCM, and all conservation and management measures and provisions of 
the WCPFC Convention. CCMs shall identify any violations by vessels flagged to a CNM and report on 
any investigations of such violations to the Secretariat for attention by TCC. 
 
Participatory rights of each CNM in 2020 
 
59. 
Curaçao: The participatory rights of Curaçao are limited to carrier vessels to engage in 
transhipment activities in the Convention area. 
60. 
Ecuador: The participatory rights of Ecuador for fishing in the WCPO are limited to purse seine 
fishing, with no participatory rights for fishing on the high seas for highly migratory fish stocks in the 
Convention Area. Any introduction of purse seine fishing capacity is to be in accordance with paragraph 
12 of CMM 2019-01 and CMM 2018-01 or its replacement measure.  
61. 
El Salvador: The participatory rights of El Salvador for fishing in the WCPO are limited to purse 
seine fishing only. The total level of effort by purse seine vessels of El Salvador on the high seas shall 
not exceed 29 days in the Convention Area. Any introduction of purse seine fishing capacity is to be in 
accordance with paragraph 12 of CMM 2019-01 and CMM 2018-01 or its replacement measure 
62. 
Liberia: The participatory rights of Liberia are limited to carrier vessels to engage in 
transhipment activities in the Convention area. 
63. 
Nicaragua: The participatory rights of Nicaragua are limited to purse seine fishing for one vessel, 
with no participatory rights for fishing on the high seas for highly migratory fish stocks in the Convention 
Area. Any introduction of fishing capacity is to be in accordance with paragraph 12 of CMM 2019-01 
and CMM 2018-01 or its replacement measure. 
64. 
Panama: The participatory rights of Panama in the WCPO are limited to the provision of carrier 
and bunker vessels. Panama’s participatory rights also apply to vessels that supply food, water and spare 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
13  
  
parts to carrier vessels that engage in transhipment activities, provided that these vessels do not engage 
in activities supporting fishing vessels, including providing and/or servicing FADs. 
65. 
Thailand: The participatory rights of Thailand in the WCPO are limited to the provision of 
carrier and bunker vessels only. 
66. 
Vietnam: The participatory rights of Vietnam in the WCPO are limited to the provision of carrier 
and bunker vessels only.  
 
WCPFC/IATTC Overlap Area  
 
67. 
In accordance with the decision of WCPFC9 regarding the management of the overlap area of 
4˚S and between 130˚W and 150˚W, vessels flagged to Ecuador, El Salvador, Nicaragua and Panama will 
be governed by the IATTC when fishing in the overlap area.  
68. 
In accordance with the Data Exchange MOU agreed by both Commissions, fishing vessels flying 
the flag of a member of either the IATTC or WCPFC shall cooperate with the RFMO to which they are 
not a member by voluntarily providing operational catch and effort data for its fishing activities for highly 
migratory species in the overlap area.  
69. 
For the purpose of investigation of possible IUU fishing activities and consistent with 
international and domestic laws, vessels flying the flag of a CNM that is a Contracting Party to the IATTC 
will cooperate with those coastal State members of the WCPFC whose EEZs occur in the overlap area by 
voluntarily providing VMS reports (date, time and position) to those coastal States when operating in the 
overlap area. 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 4 — NEW PROPOSALS 
DP01 
 
70. 
FSM as the FFC Chair introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP01 FFA key priorities for WCPFC16. The 
FFC Chair called attention to CMM 2013-06 on SIDS assessment and the Harvest Strategy Work Plan and 
the need for more consideration of implications of harvest strategies and associated capacity building needs 
(addressed under agenda item 6.1). He also noted the skipjack TRP review, with a specific proposal for 
revising the wording of CMM 2015-06 on the skipjack TRP, which needs to be adjusted to reflect the revised 
skipjack stock assessment, observing that the updated analysis indicates that, with the new assessment 
model, a spawning biomass depletion ratio of 42% is projected to achieve roughly the same fishery outcomes 
as the 50% TRP was projected to achieve when it was adopted in 2015; therefore FFA proposes the TRP be 
adjusted from 50% to 42%; and that the text describe the TRP in terms of the conditions of the fishery in 
2012 to avoid a similar problem in the future. Other items highlighted by the FFC Chair included yellowfin 
and bigeye tuna TRPs, timing of the management-science dialogue, the review of the Transhipment CMM, 
the work of the ERandEM Working Group, SW Pacific swordfish, renewal of CMM 2016-05 (Charter 
Notification Scheme), and fisheries subsidies. 
 
 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
14  
  
DP02 
71. 
Palau on behalf of FFA members introduced WCPFC-2019-DP02 Proposal for a CMM on Mobuild 
Rays caught in Association with fisheries in the WCPFC Convention Area. It stated that the proposal was 
presented to TCC15 and acknowledged the feedback received from many CCMs. As noted by SC12, 
mobulid rays are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of fishing, both as a target and bycatch species. There 
are insufficient data to properly monitor their status, meaning that a precautionary approach to management 
is required. For that reason, mobulid rays are already protected under the Convention on Migratory Species, 
CITES and by both the IATTC and the IOTC. The proposal would provide an equivalent level of protection 
in WCPFC fisheries. The proposal implements a prohibition on targeting and retaining mobulid rays, 
requires the prompt release of unintentionally caught rays, and the collection and submission of scientific 
data, obtained through interactions with these rays, to the Commission for an assessment of mobulid rays 
by 2023. It also incorporates best practice voluntary handling guidelines for the safe release of mantas and 
mobulid rays.  
72. 
The EU stated it was fully supportive of the measure and reminded CCMs of its prior offer (at 
TCC15 and subsequently before the WCPFC16) to be a co-sponsor of the measure, which is repeatedly and 
inexplicably not endorsed by the proponents. The EU inquired whether extending the measure to 
recreational fisheries was appropriate. It was agreed that this proposal would be addressed under Agenda 
Item 8.4.  
DP03 
 
73. 
Australia, on behalf of FFA members, introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP03 Proposal on CMM 2018-
07, Section XI: Future Work, para 46(i): development of a process for assessing CCM actions in accordance 
with para 7(ii)(b) to replace para 27, which seeks to resolve the issue of conducting compliance assessments 
against CCMs based on individual vessel-level infringements identified in the WCPFC Secretariat’s online 
compliance case file system (CCFS). Australia stated that for several years the Commission had invested 
considerable effort to scrutinize CCM’s implementation, monitoring, and enforcement of certain obligations 
based on the activities of single vessels. The result is a compliance status for “Flag State Investigation” and 
a required accompanying report, “Investigation Status Report” that CCMs must submit yearly to update 
their internal actions with respect to specific cases involving each flagged vessel. This is counter to the 
purpose of the CMS (in paragraph 1 of the CMM): “...The purpose of the CMS is also to assess flag CCM 
action in relation to alleged violations by its vessels, not to assess compliance by individual vessels.” 
Australia stated that while the CCFS is an important tool for all CCMs to track and manage alleged 
infringements by their vessels and persons, their proposal would change the way in which information 
coming from the CCFS is used, by making the aggregated report provided by the WCPFC Executive 
Director pursuant to paragraph 26(ii) of the CMS measure the main report used by TCC in assessing 
implementation by CCMs of their obligations. That aggregated report provides a broad overview of systemic 
implementation issues across obligations, by flag CCMs, enabling identification of particular issues that 
require further attention, with a view to providing CCMs with needed support and assistance. Australia 
reiterated that resolving the issue at WCPFC16 was the highest CMS priority for FFA members and looked 
forward to working with other CCMs to reach a suitable outcome. The proposal was further discussed under 
Agenda Item 10.2. 
DP04 
 
74. 
Tonga, on behalf of FFA members, introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP04 Climate Change. FFA 
members, proposed action on three fronts: 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
15  
  
i. 
Increased focus and attention under SC’s Ecosystem and Bycatch Theme on the implications of 
climate change for the region’s tuna stocks; 
ii. Active consideration by the Commission of how, through appropriate CMMs, it can: 
a.  
mitigate the impacts of climate change on Pacific Island countries arising from the influence 
of climate change on regional tuna stocks;  
b.  
reduce the carbon footprint of fishing in the Convention Area for fish stocks managed by 
the Commission; and  
iii. Ongoing action by the WCPFC Secretariat and members, as well as other participants to Commission 
meetings, to reduce their collective carbon footprint, and the carbon footprint associated with 
WCPFC meetings.  
FFA members stated that they looked forward to working with fellow CCMs to respond proactively to the 
threat of climate change.  
75. 
The EU noted for the record that having the delegation proposals shortly before the meeting made 
it difficult for CCMs to take a position, referring in particular to the paper on climate change, given the need 
to have time to consult with stakeholders, and its member states.  
76. 
The proposal was further discussed under Agenda Item 13.2A. 
DP05 
 
77. 
Samoa, on behalf of FFA members, introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP05 South Pacific Albacore 
Roadmap and Harvest Strategy. They stated that the much needed work to recover the fishery to the TRP 
as soon as economically possible should begin in earnest, and that zone-based management would be a key 
component in management of the stock and ensuring that FFA members’ sovereign rights were preserved 
within regionally-compatible limits. FFA members stated that they would reinvigorate the Albacore 
Roadmap Work Plan to clearly lay out realistic timelines for development of a revised South Pacific albacore 
CMM, including timely implementation and monitoring. FFA members nominated Fiji to take over the 
chairing of the Roadmap process and thanked New Zealand for their prior work in that role. The proposal 
was further discussed under Agenda Item 7.3.1. 
DP06 
 
78. 
Niue, on behalf of FFA members, introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP06 Views on high seas limits and 
allocation in the tropical tuna CMM, which presents FFA members’ views on high seas limits and 
allocation. Specifically, the paper provides the FFA position on the provisions of CMM 2018-01 that commit 
to agree on limits and an allocation framework for the purse seine fishery in the high seas and the longline 
bigeye fishery. The proposals were discussed under Agenda Items 7.2.2.1, 7.2.2.3 and 7.2.2. 
DP07 
 
79. 
New Zealand introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP07, Proposal on guidelines for the safe-handling and 
release of seabirds. New Zealand stated that it has the highest global diversity of albatross and petrel species 
in the world, with several species assessed as being at high or very high risk from commercial fisheries 
bycatch; accordingly, protection of seabirds is of great importance to New Zealand. Bycatch in pelagic 
longline fisheries is one of the greatest threats to seabirds, particularly albatrosses and petrels. New Zealand 
proposed adoption of non-binding guidelines for the handling and safe release of seabirds, which represent 
best practice advice developed by ACAP. The guidelines were endorsed by SC15, highlighted at TCC15, 
and supported by FFA members. The issue was further discussed under Agenda Item 8.3.  
 
 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
16  
  
DP08  
 
80. 
The EU introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP08 Proposal to amend CMM 2010-06 (WCPFC IUU List), 
stating that the proposal includes two key components: it introduces procedures for cross-listing and 
delisting of vessels engaged in IUU activities, and actions to be taken by CCMs against their nationals who 
are involved in IUU activities. It follows up on discussions at TCC15 (TCC15-2019-06a). The EU stated 
its belief that the proposed amendments would allow WCPFC to more effectively combat IUU fishing, and 
that cross-listing could effectively contribute to close the door in all regions to all vessels involved in IUU 
fishing, which would help to reduce incentives to become involved in IUU activities.  
81. 
Australia on behalf of FFA members affirmed their commitment to combating IUU fishing, 
including through information sharing and cooperative responses to IUU. They acknowledged the risk posed 
by vessels that undermine international fisheries frameworks when they come into the Pacific region and 
that IUU fishing can only be effectively controlled by the cooperative actions of coastal states, port states, 
market states, states with nationals involved and regional bodies such as WCPFC. FFA members noted the 
proposal introduced two issues: the recognition of the IUU lists of other RFMOs, and a mechanism for the 
sharing of information on nationals engaged in IUU fishing. FFA members recognised and supported the 
principle the EU sought to achieve but raised concerns regarding the proposal’s administrative impact and 
implementation and noted their finding that the proposal would have significantly more impact on national 
administrations than suggested by the EU’s CMM 2013-06 assessment. They noted that the process is 
operational in other RFMOs and welcomed further explanations and guidance from the EU, and requested 
a proper analysis and assessment of the legal and institutional implications associated with recognition of 
IUU vessel lists of other RFMOs, especially non-tuna RFMOs, in order to enable a discussion of the 
potential risks for and liability of the Commission and CCMs. Regarding the control of nationals and 
reciprocal and cooperative arrangements for the exchange of information, FFA members requested that the 
EU provide a proper analysis/assessment of the legal and institutional implications, including but not limited 
to risks and liability associated with confidential information. FFA members stated that while control of 
nationals is important, as is information sharing, it must be subject to domestic laws and regulations. 
82. 
The proposal was further addressed under Agenda Item 11. 
DP09 
83. 
 The EU introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP09, Joint T-RFMO FAD Work Group recommendations 
for consideration by WCPFC. The main recommendations focussed on effectively managing the use of 
FADs  and sharing information among RFMOs. The EU stated that given the importance of FAD fisheries 
in the WCPFC it suggested that the FAD management options WG consider the recommendations and 
continue engaging with the joint t-RFMO FAD working group. The issue was further discussed under 
Agenda Item 7.2.2.4. 
DP10 
 
84. 
The United States introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP10 Proposals on Tropical Tunas, containing 
three discrete proposals relating to the Commission’s CMMs for the tropical tuna stocks as follow:  
i. 
A proposal to establish a plan of work for the Commission to move forward on its task, under 
paragraph 44 of CMM 2018-01, of agreeing on hard limits for bigeye tuna in the longline fishery. 
This was further considered under Agenda Item 7.2.2.3; 
ii. A proposal to establish a plan of work for the Commission to move forward on its task, under 
paragraph 28 of CMM 2018-01, of agreeing on purse seine fishing effort or catch limits in the high 
seas of the Convention Area. This was further considered under Agenda Item 7.2.2.1; and 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
17  
  
iii. A proposal to (a) revise paragraph 18 of CMM 2018-01 with respect to the treatment of floating 
objects for the purpose of the FAD closures, (b) revise paragraph 4 of CMM 2009-02 with respect to 
the distance from FADs that must be maintained during FAD closures, and (c) request SPC to 
undertake work to inform consideration by the SC and the Commission of narrowing the definition 
of a FAD to objects with tracking buoys for the purpose of the FAD closures. This was further 
considered under Agenda Item 7.2.2.4. 
  
DP11 
 
85. 
The United States introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP11 Rules of Procedure Relating to the Northern 
Committee. It noted that the NC has twice failed to obtain a quorum at its long-planned and properly noticed 
regular annual sessions. To enable those engaged in the NC to take timely decisions and to help ensure that 
the NC can fulfill its functions in a cost-effective manner, the United States proposed that the Commission 
reduce the proportion of NC members that must be present to open meetings and permit debate. 
86. 
FSM on behalf of FFA members stated their view that the same threshold for quorum should apply 
to all meetings of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies, and that to allow for a lower threshold for a 
quorum in NC was not agreeable. FFA members encouraged the members of the NC to consider how they 
could incentivise participation in NC meetings, noting that the meetings often take place outside the region 
and attendance can be a challenge for administrations that are already stretched with their regional meeting 
agenda and tackling domestic fisheries priorities. They suggested that one possibility was to hold NC 
meetings alongside one of the meetings of a subsidiary body of the Commission. 
87. 
The proposal was further discussed under Agenda Item 9.2.  
DP12 
 
88. 
The United States introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP12, Rebuilding Plan for North Pacific Striped 
Marlin, noting that because North Pacific striped marlin is generally not targeted, it was more appropriate 
to develop a rebuilding plan for the stock than a harvest strategy, and that the rebuilding plan could be 
incorporated as appropriate into harvest strategies for other fisheries. The United States stated that the 
primary objective in any rebuilding plan is to rebuild the stock to a specific level in a specific time, and for 
the purpose of designing CMMs to achieve that objective, the plan included a specific probability for 
achieving the objective. Given the WCPFC’s hierarchical approach for setting reference points, and because 
the stock recruitment relationship for North Pacific striped marlin is not well known, the rebuilding target 
was expressed in terms relative to the size of the estimated unfished spawning stock.  
89. 
China inquired what the intention was for the format of the rebuilding plan — whether this would 
be part of the meeting record, or in the form of a CMM? The United States stated that the rebuilding plan 
would be a standalone document that would be posted under the Harvest Strategy section of the WCPFC 
website. The Commission would then have an obligation to reach the rebuilding targets; the specific 
requirements of how this would be done would be in the form of a CMM. 
90. 
The EU stated that while the proposal was a step in the right direction, the very depleted state of the 
stock required urgent action. The EU stated it understood the difficulty in managing North Pacific striped 
marlin, which is caught as bycatch, but stressed the need to do more in the form of concrete actions based 
on a fully-fledged rebuilding plan. The EU noted the need to discuss potential actions that would contribute 
to the rebuilding when the issue would be discussed later in the agenda.  
91. 
In response to an inquiry from PNG, the United States confirmed that the last benchmark assessment 
was in 2019, using figures up to 2017.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
18  
  
92. 
The proposal was further discussed under Agenda Item 7.7.1. 
DP13 
 
93. 
United States introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP13 Proposal for CMM for Charter Notification 
Scheme. It noted that the current WCPFC Charter Notification Scheme, CMM 2016-05, would expire on 31 
December 2019 unless renewed by the Commission. SC15 (Summary Report, para. 71) and TCC15 
(Workplan 2019–2021) identified potential issues with the management of chartered vessels under the 
current CMM. To allow time to identify and fully consider these issues, the United States stated it was 
proposing that the Commission roll the current measure over for a period of two years during which time 
the Commission and its subsidiary bodies should fully consider outstanding issues with the measure and 
explore potential improvements. The proposal was further discussed under Agenda Item 13.2.A 
DP14 
 
94. 
The United States introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP14 Draft guidelines for participation of 
observers in closed meetings of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies which consider the compliance 
monitoring report. The United States stated that at WCPFC13, the Commission agreed to develop and adopt 
guidelines to enable the participation of NGO observers at closed meetings of the Commission and its 
subsidiary bodies, in advance of TCC13 (WCPFC13 Summary Report, para. 658). The United States 
volunteered to develop a set of draft guidelines as well as a draft confidentiality agreement to be signed by 
observer representatives for their participation in closed sessions that consider the compliance monitoring 
report. CCMs provided comments on early versions of the draft guidelines and a final version was circulated 
for intersessional adoption in advance of TCC13. However, CCMs were unable to agree on the proposed 
guidelines. Some CCMs indicated that it would be more appropriate to wait for the final report from the 
Independent Panel to review the CMS prior to making a final decision on the adoption of guidelines. The 
final recommendations from the Independent Panel to review the CMS were circulated in March 2018 
(WCPFC Circular 2018-15) and included a recommendation to adopt a phased process for observers to 
participate in all CMS discussions (Final Report from the Independent Panel to review the Compliance 
Monitoring Scheme, para. 34). In 2018, the Commission adopted CMM 2018-07, (CMM for the CMS), 
which commits the Commission to a multi-year work plan, including the development of guidelines for 
participation of observers in closed meetings of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies that consider the 
CMR. The measure specifies that the work will take place during 2020–2021. During TCC15, in an effort 
to ensure that the work progresses during 2020, the United States offered to recirculate the previously drafted 
guidelines for the participation of observers in closed TCC and Commission sessions that consider the CMR. 
WCPFC16-2019-DP14 comprises the draft guidelines and draft confidentiality agreement as circulated in 
WCPFC Circular 2017-40. As agreed at TCC15, the United States stated it was offering the same draft 
guidelines for consideration by WCPFC16, where they could be considered under Agenda Item 10.2, review 
of the work plan of tasks to enhance the CMS. 
95. 
Vanuatu, on behalf of FFA members, thanked the United States for their work on this issue, and 
recognised it as a constructive effort to address the concerns that CCMs, including FFA members, had raised 
with respect to the participation of observers in sessions dealing with the CMR. FFA members stated they 
would be ready to consider the issue once they had collectively agreed to a revised CMS measure that FFA 
members are comfortable was working as intended. They noted there was much work yet to be done, 
particularly on the issue of removing the “Flag State Investigation” elements of CMM 2018-07.  
96. 
The issue was further discussed under Agenda Item 10.2 
 
 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
19  
  
DP15 
 
97. 
Korea introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP15 Proposed amendment to CMM for protection of 
cetaceans from purse seine fishing operations (CMM 2011-03), noting that according to a technical paper 
by FAO (Bycatch in longline fisheries for tuna and tuna-like species: A global review of status and 
mitigation measures, presented in draft form to SC10 as SC10-2014/EB-IP04), marine mammals such as 
cetaceans and seals are known to interact with longline gear, although information on marine mammal 
interaction with longline fisheries is limited. Korea stated that CMM 2011-03 addresses protection of 
cetaceans from purse seine fishing operations but no WCPFC CMMs pertain to the issue of operational 
interactions between marine mammals and longline fisheries. There is no specific advice from SC regarding 
the population of cetacean species or bycatch mitigation measure but Korea stated that this is a result of the 
lack of information and data on cetacean interactions with longline as well as purse seine fisheries, and that 
it was crucial for the Commission to collect as much information and data as possible while protecting all 
cetacean species to the extent practicable, as a precautionary and comprehensive ecosystem approach. Korea 
stated it believes that, once sufficient information and data are accumulated, SC may produce specific 
recommendations for cetaceans, preferably by species. In that context, the proposal seeks to expand the 
scope of application of CMM 2011-03 to longline fisheries. Because no fishery under the purview of 
WCPFC is known to target cetaceans, Korea stated that in its view the new obligation would not create 
practical difficulties for CCMs.  
98. 
Fiji, on behalf of FFA members, stated it supported the intent of the proposal to improve the 
information available on potential interaction of cetaceans with longline fisheries, which in the long term 
could help the Commission to understand these interactions and enact effective measures to prevent 
incidental catches of these species, some of which are endangered. With this understanding FFA members 
stated they believed the information collected should be that which is of value to SPC’s work, and therefore 
referred the proposal to SC for their analyses on the type of information that should be collected. 
99. 
The proposal was further addressed under Agenda Item 8.4. 
DP16 
 
100. 
Korea introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP16, Proposed changes to the Rules for the FAD Closure, 
noting that periodic FAD closures had been in place between 20°N and 20°S since 2009, following the 
adoption of CMM 2008-01. However, Korea raised the issue of compliance resulting from observer-reported 
alleged FAD sets during FAD closures (i.e. vessels setting on FADs when they assumed they were setting 
on a free school), which required effort and at times money to address. Korea stated that other tuna-RFMOs 
(e.g., IATTC and IOTC) had adopted much clearer FAD definitions, and Korea stated those organizations 
had been able to implement FAD-related measures more effectively and systematically, and avoided many 
unnecessary disputes that would have arisen in the absence of such definitions. Korea submitted a proposal 
to WCPFC15 to change the existing rules for FAD closures with a proposed FAD definition very similar to 
that in place in IATTC. However, the Commission adopted compromise text (paragraph 18 of CMM 2018-
01) as a result of diverging views on the proposal. Nevertheless, Korea stated that in its view there was still 
room for improvement. Analysis by SPC (WCPFC-SC15-2019/MI-WP-11) suggested the potential 
impacts of paragraph 18 of CMM 2018-01 on the measure’s performance could be assumed to be negligible, 
although it was challenging for SPC to evaluate impacts precisely as key words (e.g., ‘garbage’ and ‘small’) 
in the paragraph were not defined. Korea raised this as one reason the Commission should revisit the issue 
and further refine the paragraph. Korea suggested a definition of FAD such as that used by IATTC would 
be much clearer and enforceable, but acknowledged this could be a drastic change for some CCMs, and 
stated that it shared their concerns to some extent. Consequently, Korea submitted the proposal in DP16 as 
an interim measure and looked forward to its adoption by the Commission; it stated its view that it was 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
20  
  
highly inappropriate to regress to the previous definition of FAD or rules for FAD closure — i.e. the 
provisions in CMM 2017-01 — and that at a minimum the current text of paragraph 18 of CMM 2018-01 
should be retained until the Commission agreed with and adopted an alternative definition of FAD. 
101. 
 The proposal was further discussed under Agenda Item 7.2.2.4. 
DP17 
 
102. 
Japan introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP17 Proposed research project to compare WCPFC 
aggregated historical VMS data with AIS data on the WCPFC high seas, stating that Japan’s Fisheries 
Research and Education Agency (FRA), the Australian National Centre for Ocean Resources and Security 
(ANCORS) at the University of Wollongong and Global Fishing Watch (GFW) had entered into a 
collaborative partnership agreement to investigate IUU fishing and strengthen transparency and governance 
of fisheries. Japan drew attention of CCMs to a research project proposed by FRA, GFW and ANCORS, 
which intends to compare AIS data and aggregated WCPFC high seas VMS data. The research project seeks 
to estimate AIS data coverage, identify data gaps between AIS data and WCPFC VMS data, and estimate 
total fishing effort in the WCPFC high seas area. Japan stated that the proposed project would increase the 
transparency of high seas fishing activities and enable the further development of methodologies for 
estimating and verifying fishing effort estimates, which would bring significant benefits to the understanding 
of high seas fishing operations and improve the accuracy of AIS data used for scientific studies. 
103. 
PNG and Indonesia thanked Japan for making the information available in the delegation paper.  
104. 
The EU inquired why the project was limited to the high seas and noted that VMS data would be 
aggregated to flag. It stated that given the EU has just 2 vessels eligible for the project, aggregated data was 
not suitable in terms of the data rules. Japan stated that under the current data rules (2009) paragraph 13.5 
stipulates that high seas VMS data will be made available, and thus the data rule allows use of VMS data 
for the high seas only. 
105. 
The issue was further addressed under Agenda Item 13.2.A.1. 
DP20 
 
106. 
Indonesia introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP20 Harvest Strategies for Tropical Tuna in Archipelagic 
Waters of Indonesia. It reminded that the WCPFC adopted CMM 2014-06 on establishing a harvest strategy 
for key fisheries and stocks in the WCPO, and agreed to a work plan for the adoption of harvest strategies 
in 2015. Indonesia stated that it intends to develop harvest strategies for its archipelagic waters that are 
compatible with measures mandated by WCPFC and IOTC. The paper provides an update on Indonesia’s 
progress to develop harvest strategies for its archipelagic waters. 
DP21 
 
107. 
Indonesia introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP21 Improvement on data collection for shark as bycatch 
in tuna fisheries, which details Indonesia’s challenges and capacity building needs. Indonesia related that 
provision of shark catch data (by species and gear) remains challenging for Indonesia to provide to the 
Commission. Indonesia submitted a capacity development plan to the Secretariat on 28 September 2017, 
with progress reported to the TCC15. Previous national annual catch estimate workshops focused on the 
catch by gear of the main tuna species, while shark catch data (by gear and species) were not discussed in 
detail. Discussion of the catch estimate on sharks (by species and gear) using available statistical fisheries 
data, port sampling data, log book and observer data have been proposed to be included in the next annual 
catch estimates workshop, which may require extending the workshop; it will also discuss issues related to 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
21  
  
the provision of bycatch and discarded data. It is expected that the workshop will provide an estimation of 
shark catch (per species and gear) as well as catch of shark from logbooks and the observer program.  
IWG Sharks 
 
108. 
The IWG Sharks Chair (Japan) introduced the work of the IWG Sharks, which began in 2018. 
During WCPFC15 many discussions were held on the comprehensive shark CMM. Disagreements were 
reduced until only one issue remained: addressing the issue of “fins naturally attached”. An 8th version of 
the draft CMM was submitted to TCC15, and the comments received were incorporated in a new 9th version 
of the draft CMM (WCPFC16-2019-IWGSharks-01) submitted for consideration by WCPFC16.  
109. 
The issue was addressed further under Agenda Item 8.2.  
IWG-CMS Audit Points 
 
110. 
The IWG-CMS Audit Points Chair (FSM) introduced the work of the IWG, which agreed at TCC15 
to use a template. The IWG report (WCPFC16-2019-IWG_CMSAuditPoints-01) provides a side by side 
comparison of the former method used by WCPFC and the template, the work of which will continue 
through 2020 to enable a proper review. 
111. 
 The issue was further discussed under Agenda Item 10.2.  
ERandEM WG 
 
112. 
The ERandEM WG Chair (Australia) presented WCPFC16-2019-ERandEMWG-01, which 
delivers against a TCC15 outcome for the ERandEM WG Chair to present a revised EM concept paper to 
WCPFC16, taking into consideration Project 93 and relevant discussions as well as input from CCMs. The 
paper proposes a goal, including subobjectives, for Electronic Monitoring in the WCPFC and includes 
revisions to the draft minimum standards informed by discussions at ERandEM WG3, an FFA-led EM 
Workshop in Honiara in October 2019, and information provided by CCMs as requested in Commission 
Circular 2019/70. 
113. 
 The issue was further discussed under Agenda Item 9.4.2 
DP22 
 
114. 
Indonesia introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP22 Information on Database of Indonesian Vessels 
Authorized to Fish for Tuna, noting that in accordance with CMM 2018-06 (Record of Fishing Vessels and 
Authorization to Fish), and Indonesia’s Presidential Regulation No. 61 of 2013, the WCPF Convention 
applies only to that portion of Indonesia’s EEZ within the Pacific Ocean (as defined by Article 3 of the 
Convention), and does not cover archipelagic waters, territorial waters, and internal waters. Therefore, 
Indonesia’s fishing vessels that are authorized to fish in archipelagic waters, territorial waters, and internal 
waters of Indonesia have no obligation to register in the WCPFC Record of Fishing Vessels (ROFV). 
However, Indonesia faces a marketing issue, whereby a few importing countries were questioning the 
registration status of Indonesian fishing vessels that fish within Indonesian waters but are not under the 
jurisdiction of the Commission, and were not accepting Indonesian tuna products from these vessels. To 
address this issue Indonesia is developing a Database of Indonesia Vessels Authorized to Fish for Tuna 
(DIVA-TUNA), a database of authorized fishing vessels that catch tuna and neritic tuna within Indonesian 
waters, which includes archipelagic waters, territorial waters, EEZ waters, and fishing vessels authorized to 
fish in the convention area and registered in the RFV. The aim is to register, verify and monitor all 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
22  
  
Indonesian fishing vessel that are authorized to fish for tuna, with the objective of applying and ensuring 
the traceability of tuna products throughout the tuna supply chain for better acceptance by international and 
high-value markets, to implement the management practices according to RFMO standards, to have 
transparency of tuna fishery management within Indonesian waters, and help combat IUU fishing activities. 
In establishing DIVA-TUNA Indonesia is seeking compatibility with CMM 2018-06, and DIVA-TUNA 
will serve as a complete repository of fishing vessels that are legal to operate within Indonesian waters.  
DP23 
 
115. 
Indonesia introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP23 Information Paper on Labour Rights in the Fishing 
Industry (The Case of Unpaid Salary Disputes on Fishing Vessels), stating that on 13 November 2019 
Indonesia was notified via email by the WCPFC Secretariat regarding an unpaid salary dispute at Apia Port 
in Samoa concerning several Indonesian crew members who tried to retrieve their salary from a fishing 
company based in one of the member countries of the WCPFC. Indonesia stated its belief that the company 
was breaking the law, and running a salary scam by not paying salary dues for at least 97 crewmen since 
January, 2019. In the hope of resolving the situation, the crewing agency sent correspondence via e-mail to 
UNESCO, UNDP, and UN-ILO offices in the area. In the same spirit Indonesia stated it was raising this 
concern to the Commission, and it considered the dispute an issue of labour abuse, particularly in terms 
where crews are forced to work intensely, over long periods of time, in difficult and dangerous conditions, 
with low or no pay. Indonesia stated that it hoped that the case could be resolved immediately to ensure the 
safety and the wellbeing of all the fishing crews, and that various actions, as detailed in WCPFC16-2019-
DP23, could be taken to reduce the potential for such problems in the future.  
116. 
Samoa thanked Indonesia for its statement explaining DP23 relating to an unpaid salary dispute 
involving a vessel and its crew that called in to Apia Port in Samoa. Samoa also thanked the Chair for 
considering Samoa’s paper notwithstanding Rule 20 of the Commission Procedures. Samoa stated that it 
was very concerned that such incidents and reports relating to the welfare of crews, and in this 
case, alleged labour abuse were being reported in relation to fishing vessels operating in the Pacific region. 
The matter was brought to the attention of the Samoan government through an email communication from 
an agent of the crew working on the vessels. The government looked into the matter when the fishing vessels 
in question visited Samoa’s port. Samoa noted that the vessels concerned are not licensed to fish in Samoa 
and primarily operate in the high seas. Samoa raised the matter with the relevant flag state for necessary 
attention and corrective actions through government-to-government processes, and also raised this matter 
with both the WCPFC and FFA Secretariats. Samoa reiterated the importance of the responsibilities of flag 
states as well as the collective effort of all CCMs as these relate to WCPFC Resolution 2018-01 to ensure 
the wellbeing of crews on fishing vessels operating in the WCPO. The FFA Minimum Terms and Conditions 
for Access by Fishing Vessels (MTCs) is also a fundamental mechanism to regulate access, and Samoa 
called for stronger actions by the WCPFC in this regard.  
117. 
New Zealand on behalf of FFA members thanked Indonesia for submitting DP23 and supported the 
statement by Samoa. New Zealand stated that DP23 highlighted the serious labour issues occurring on 
vessels in the region, and the need for CCMs to take stronger action to address these issues; as well as to 
take steps to prevent further human rights abuses occurring on vessels in the Convention area. New Zealand 
encouraged other CCMs to follow Indonesia’s example and report similar incidents to the Commission, 
consistent with paragraph 5 of Resolution 2018-01 on Labour Standards for Crew on Fishing Vessels. FFA 
members noted that Resolution 2018-01 was an important step for the Commission and highlighted the 
decision by FFA Ministers in June 2019 to include labour standards in the region’s -harmonised Minimum 
Terms and Conditions for access to commercial tuna vessels fishing in FFA members waters. They looked 
forward to working with CCMs to further strengthen WCPFC’s efforts to promote fair working conditions 
for crews on fishing vessels, including a safe and secure working environment with minimum risk to health 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
23  
  
and wellbeing; fair terms of employment; decent working and living conditions on board vessels; decent 
and regular remuneration; and the opportunity to disembark, and seek repatriation if so entitled. 
118. 
Cook Islands updated CCMs regarding its efforts regarding Resolution 2018-01, which they 
supported to ensure that working conditions on fishing vessels operating in its waters and of vessels flying 
its flag would be consistent with international best practice. Cook Islands acceded in November 2019 to the 
IMO’s 2012 Cape Town Agreement and encouraged other CCMs to do the same, and stated that Cook 
Islands’ Accession to the Maritime Labour Convention, 2006, which would take place in December 2019, 
would mean that Cook Islands would implement a suite of international legislation and take specific 
measures to ensure that the rights of all seafarers are protected within their waters, and further abroad for 
vessels flying its flag.  
119. 
Indonesia thanked Samoa, New Zealand and Cook Islands for addressing the labour issue, which it 
stated it had sought to raise because similar problems had been ongoing for years. It noted that Resolution 
2018-01 was not binding, and that Indonesia would seek to collect evidence and propose to discuss and 
adopt a CMM that is binding for all members. Indonesia noted that the incident described in DP23 involved 
WCPFC-registered vessels and was therefore appropriately addressed by WCPFC. 
DP24 
 
120. 
Indonesia introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP24 Vessel Monitoring System in Indonesia, detailing the 
situation in Indonesia with respect to VMS reporting. Indonesia confirmed at WCPFC14 that some vessels 
are still using Argos units, as well as another type of MTU that was not in the WCPFC approved list. 
Indonesia stated that it is not easy to replace VMS systems for a country the size of Indonesia, given the 
replacement costs; it is still being decided whether the replacement costs will be covered by the government 
or by the fishing industry and fishers. At WCPFC14 the Commission agreed that CCMs shall ensure vessels 
flying their flag do not purchase, install or transfer several VMS units and that they be removed from the 
WCPFC approved ALC/MTU list. The Commission further agreed that existing units on vessels shall be 
allowed to continue to operate for 5 years (until 1 January 2023). CCMs whose vessels use these models 
shall provide a list of vessels that are using the units to the Secretariat and shall update the list annually. 
Indonesia stated that additional details are provided in WCPFC16-2019-DP24.  
121. 
All proposals tabled for WCPFC16 consideration were introduced and proponents of proposals 
were encouraged to discuss them at the margins of the meeting and to report back on their progress to 
plenary.   
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 5 — SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS OF DEVELOPING STATES  
5.1 
Implementation of Article 30 of WCPFC Convention and CMM 2013-07 (SIDS special 
requirements)  
122. 
The Chair noted that para. 20 of CMM 2013-07 requires an annual review of implementation of this 
measure, and referenced WCPFC16-2019-IP01: Summary from Part 2 CMM 2013-07 paragraph 19 annual 
reports (WCPFC-TCC15-2019-11) and WCPFC16-2019-DP18: Report of the European Union on Article 
30 of the Convention and Resolution 2008-01 of WCPFC (EU).  
123. 
Tuvalu, on behalf of FFA members, stated that implementation of Article 30 of the WCPF 
Convention is fundamental to the success of the Commission. FFA members recalled the decision taken at 
WCPFC15 to establish a separate page on the WCPFC website dedicated to information relating to the 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
24  
  
Implementation of Article 30 and were pleased to see that the WCPFC Secretariat has completed that task. 
The webpage contains useful information that all CCMs and Observers can regularly consult. FFA members 
stated that the discussion under this agenda item was the foundation of all of work at WCPFC16, in ensuring 
that the principles in the Convention relating to the special needs and requirements of developing States are 
at the forefront of Commission decisions. Equally important is the need to ensure that the Commission’s 
processes are supporting both the capacity limitations and needs of SIDS CCMs. FFA members noted with 
appreciation the efforts by non-SIDS CCMs to report against CMM 2013-07 in their Annual Report Part 2. 
They stated that in the future it would be helpful for everyone if a standardized reporting format was adopted, 
and stated FFA members would seek to provide some guidance at WCPFC17. Given the busy agenda FFA 
members reminded CCMs to be mindful of small delegations and their fundamental right, not just to 
participate, but to participate effectively in the Commission’s work, which in some cases, relies on the 
support and cooperation of other CCMs.  
124. 
The EU stated its main source of funding for development is the European Development Fund 
(EDF), which finances several programmes and projects in SIDS of the region and all western and central 
Pacific.  Currently, the most important fisheries related development action in the region funded by the EDF 
is the Pacific–European Union Marine Partnership Programme, also co-funded Sweden, and totalling about 
$50 million. The objective is to improve economic, social and environmental benefits through stronger 
regional economic integration and the sustainable management of natural resources and the environment. 
The program has several components—on oceanic fisheries, coastal fisheries, IUU fishing, and capacity 
development through capacity building on education, training and research. It is primarily implemented by 
SPC and FFA, with involvement by SPREP and USP. The program started in 2018, and some developments 
are directly related to WCPFC. In terms of IUU fishing, support was provided to enhance MCS efforts, both 
oceanic and coastal, and provide support for surveillance capabilities to support regular MCS exercises. 
Directly related to fisheries, the EU contribution also includes, among others, three initiatives on climate 
change, with the objective of adaptation and reliance building for SIDS and Territories, and a programme 
for sustainable use of marine resources. A contract will also be signed soon with the Secretariat for research 
on FAD acoustics that will be financed by funds from DG MARE (fisheries budget). The EU stated that the 
information should be reflected in the capacity needs table; it acknowledged this required additional work, 
but stated that was the objective of the Commission’s new website, and would increase transparency. 
Regarding the suggestion for a template to provide information on different actions to address Article 30, 
the EU suggested it would like to receive reports from countries regarding how they are using the support.  
125. 
RMI noted and thanked the EU for their report and supported the statement by Tuvalu. On behalf 
of FFA members RMI reminded CCMs of the obligation in CMM 2013-06 to conduct a SIDS impact 
assessment in respect of new proposals and to consult with FFA SIDS members in the development of that 
assessment. They noted with appreciation Japan’s efforts over the last few years to consult directly with 
FFA members ahead of the Annual Meeting and encouraged other CCMs to do the same. RMI stated that 
the absence of CMM 2013-06 impact evaluations made it challenging for SIDS members to engage 
meaningfully in discussions on new proposals, which could delay or prevent their adoption, and stated that 
implementation of CMM 2013-06 was not a checklist, but a process. They stated that over time various 
approaches have been used to conduct the CMM 2013-06 impact assessments, which has made it difficult 
for SIDS members to review the true impacts of proposed new measures. If CCMs are still unsure as to how 
the CMM 2013-06 evaluations should be completed, FFA members referred to WCPFC15-2018-
DP12_Rev1 available on the WCPFC web page under the Article 30 Implementation tab which provides 
guidance to CCMs on completing CMM 2013-06 evaluations. FFA members observed that CMM 2013-06 
has been in place for six years and CCMs have had ample time to work with SIDS CCMs to understand the 
requirements of the CMM. They encouraged CCMs to engage early in consultations with SIDS CCMs as to 
any potential impacts of a proposal on SIDS so as to avoid situations where SIDS CCMs are forced to reject 
new proposals that lack adequate impact assessments. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
25  
  
126. 
Japan stated it fully recognized the importance of the CMM 2013-06 criteria, noting that FFA 
members, in DP01, stated that CMM 2013-06 can only be fully implemented through consultations with 
SIDS. It stressed the importance of multiple consultations through which an understanding between the 
parties could be developed. Japan thanked RMI for acknowledging Japan’s efforts in this regard. Japan 
stated it provided SIDS with ODA and capacity building through the Japan International Cooperation 
Agency (JICA) and the Overseas Fishery Cooperation Foundation of Japan (OFCF). Between 2008–2017 
Japan provided $1.1 billion in development assistance to the Pacific Islands, which included fishery-related 
projects, and cover conservation and management of highly migratory species and assistance to small-scale 
fishermen. In 2018 Japan’s Prime Minister pledged to implement development cooperation over 3 years, 
with a particular focus on human resource development, including people-to-people exchanges. Japan also 
noted that in 2008 it established the Japan Trust Fund in WCPFC, which has been building the capacity of 
SIDS for fishery statistics and management. In November 2017 OFCF signed an agreement with FFA to 
continue cooperation through the Japan Promotion Fund until 2027. Japan stated its hope that these programs 
and funds would contribute to the development of SIDS. 
127. 
Korea stated that if SIDS CCMs were unhappy with how CMM 2013-06 is implemented this should 
be addressed. Korea observed that paragraph 3 of the CMM 2013-06 states that only the Commission shall 
assess the impact of a proposed CMM on SIDS, and suggested the need for a procedure for how an 
assessment is carried out (i.e., when and where an assessment takes place). Korea noted that it had shared 
its view with FFA members and would undertake further consultation with FFA and SIDS. 
128. 
Indonesia observed that although it is not a member of FFA, Indonesia is also a developing country. 
It acknowledged the aid provided by the EU and Japan to assist SIDS. Indonesia stated that it hoped that 
CCMs would recognize that Indonesia also has some capacity building needs in complying with new CMMs.  
129. 
Cook Islands noted the comments from Korea regarding implementation of CMM 2013-06. It 
thanked the Secretariat for setting up the webpage and stated that it would prove very useful for evaluating 
CMM 2013-06 impacts. 
130. 
RMI stated that they appreciated the efforts by all countries to provide assistance to Pacific countries 
and stressed that CMM 2013-06 focusses on the need to take into account the needs and capacity of SIDS. 
RMI thanked the Chair for her efforts to address the issue.  
131. 
WCPFC16 reaffirmed the importance of assessing the impact of proposals on SIDS and 
encouraged CCMs to undertake such assessment when submitting proposals to the Commission. 
 
5.2 
Updated Strategic Investment Plan  
132. 
The Executive Director referred to WCPFC16-2019-08, stating that one of the mechanisms adopted 
by the Commission to increase support for SIDS was adoption of a strategic investment plan. The plan seeks 
to match capacity building needs with appropriate capacity building strategies. The Executive Director 
referred CCMs to the Commission’s Article 30 webpage, which is a work in progress, and will continue to 
be updated.  
133. 
The EU referred to Table 1 and asked if this could be enhanced to show what actions are under 
implementation. The EU acknowledged this would involve more work, and would require that each CCM 
that is providing funds also provides specific information on how that funding is being used are, but stated 
it is important to know what is being done by all members. The EU also inquired regarding the funding 
source for the capacity building identified in Attachment A (about $300,000 for meeting participation). The 
Finance and Administration Manager stated that funding comes from a number of different sources. About 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
26  
  
50% is from CCMs (Canada, the United States, Australia, and Korea) via the Special Requirements Fund; 
other sources are the Working Capital Fund, the CNM Contribution Fund, and observer fees, as agreed to 
by WCPFC15. 
134. 
Cook Islands, on behalf of FFA members, thanked the WCPFC Secretariat for their report on 
Strategic Investment Plan implementation in 2019. They thanked Australia, Canada, Korea, and the United 
States for their voluntary contributions to the Special Requirements Fund, which has provided critical 
support to SIDS CCMs in their ability to participate in important Commission work throughout the year. 
FFA members noted during the FAC discussions at WCPFC16 that the SRF balance is high and 
acknowledged this was unlikely to be the case in future years as meeting participation needs continue to 
grow and capacity assistance requests are increasingly matched to the SRF for support. Some SIDS members 
still had unmet needs for support to attendance at WCPFC16 and FFA members looked forward to working 
closely with the WCPFC Executive Director on how best to ensure that the Strategic Investment Plan is 
implemented as intended and appropriate assistance is provided through the Strategic Investment Plan, 
where needs are clearly identified. FFA members also thanked the governments of Japan and Chinese Taipei 
for establishment of their respective Trust Funds that provide important support to SIDS CCMs in their 
national efforts to more effectively manage their fisheries. They noted the requests from SIDS that have 
come through various sources and the potential avenues for assistance identified by the Secretariat. For 
future Strategic Investment Plan updates, they requested that further detail be provided on how and whether 
specific requests were met, including how the Secretariat assisted with any administrative support, where 
relevant. Overall, FFA SIDS members stated they were pleased with the adoption of the Strategic Investment 
Plan by WCPFC15 and they looked forward to its further development and to working with the WCPFC 
Secretariat and other CCMs on its continued successful implementation. 
135. 
Australia supported the issues raised by Cook Islands, noting that the intent was to identify needs, 
and match those needs to potential funding sources. Australia looked forward to seeing improvements as 
outlined by the Cook Islands. 
136. 
The Commission approved the Updated 2019 Strategic Investment Plan (Attachment G*) and 
tasked the Secretariat to provide additional information and context to the revisions and updates made to 
the Strategic Investment Plan. 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 6 — HARVEST STRATEGY 
137. 
The Chair introduced the agenda item by noting that the discussion would focus on progressing 
implementation of the Agreed Work Plan for the Adoption of Harvest Strategies under CMM 2014-06 
covering South Pacific albacore, skipjack, bigeye and yellowfin. She noted that the species-specific elements 
of the Work Plan would be considered under Agenda Item 7, and that updates on harvest strategies relating 
to northern stocks would be considered in conjunction with those stocks under Agenda Item 7. She observed 
that the Commission had made some progress in implementing the work plan, but that progress has been 
rather slow. At WCPFC15 the Commission agreed to an extra day for WCPFC16 to progress discussion and 
development of elements of the work plan. She observed some CCMs expressed concern that they did not 
all have the same level of understanding of some of the complex issues under discussion, and noted that, in 
recognition of the need for capacity building, SPC-OFP was making significant effort to build CCM 
capacity, including through some innovative approaches. The Chair also thanked NGOs for their 
involvement in that process.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
27  
  
6.1 
Overview of Harvest Strategy 
138. 
Dr Rob Scott (SPC-OFP) introduced WCPFC16-2019-09 An overview of progress in developing 
WCPFC Harvest Strategies, which outlines the elements of a harvest strategy and details the progress made 
to date in developing these elements for each of the four tuna stocks, as well as the outstanding issues that 
need to be addressed in order to meet the objectives of CMM 2014-06. In addition, a brief summary was 
provided of the measures taken to enable stakeholder consultation and capacity building on the subject of 
harvest strategies. The paper notes that work to date has focussed on developing single stock evaluation 
frameworks for skipjack and South Pacific albacore but that the development of frameworks for bigeye and 
yellowfin will require further consideration of mixed fisheries interactions. The paper concludes that, while 
substantial work has been completed and significant progress has been made, it will be necessary to revise 
and update some elements of the work plan. 
139. 
PNG, on behalf of PNA members, thanked SPC for the important overview paper. PNA members 
stated that they have strongly supported work to develop harvest strategies for key tuna stocks, and continue 
to support that work because they believe that harvest strategies offer potential improvement in the 
management of WCPO tropical tuna stocks that are important to the PNA, and have already contributed to 
improving management of those stocks. In particular, PNA members see the potential benefits resulting 
from having pre-agreed rules for how fishing will be adjusted as the status of stocks changes, and from 
better taking into account uncertainty. However, for PNA members, this means that harvest strategies should 
not be seen as a way of reshaping arrangements and approaches that have already been agreed, except where 
this is necessary to ensure sustainability. PNG stated that if all CCMs try to use the harvest strategy to 
reshape existing arrangements to their own advantage, then the harvest strategy work will not progress, and 
the Commission will all lose the potential benefits from improved decision-making that harvest strategies 
offer. On this basis, PNA members looked forward to further progress on harvest strategies and would 
provide more specific comments on other elements of the Commission’s work on harvest strategies during 
WCPFC16. PNG also remarked on the need for further capacity building to enable meaningful stakeholder 
engagement. 
140. 
Indonesia acknowledged the work of SPC, and the effort to share details on the harvest strategy 
work. They noted that TRPs can be based on various management objectives, (biological, social and 
economic), which may sometimes conflict. Given that, Indonesia inquired how the Commission would 
assess the future success of the management of its stocks, particularly if the objectives result in a relatively 
ambitious TRP, such as 0.56 for albacore. Indonesia also inquired regarding the setting of catch limits and 
catch allocations in the harvest strategy process, and how decisions were made regarding the number of 
scenarios that were considered. The presenter stated that the TRP is often selected because it reflects 
conditions that were favourable at some time in a fishery. Reaching the TRP would imply those other 
conditions are being achieved. However, he noted there may be additional objectives beyond those, and 
these can be in conflict. He noted this would be further discussed under Agenda Item 6.2. Regarding 
allocation, he noted SPC assumed some future distribution of fishing, but that its harvest strategy work did 
not reflect detailed negotiations regarding the allocation of catch into individual fisheries. Regarding the 
difference in the size of the grid of models, he agreed that 288 would be more than needed for skipjack, and 
that there was some redundancy. SPC seeks to capture major aspects of uncertainty over time using a 
factorial approach, with the result the grid can become very large. He noted some aspects of the skipjack 
model could be removed, while for albacore SPC had received requests for additional aspects to be 
examined.  
141. 
Japan commented that in its view it would be best to use a multi-species approach. It was concerned 
regarding the presenter’s comment that some performance indicators (PIs) cannot be calculated, noting that 
one social PI important to Japan is “avoiding impacts on small scale fishers”. Japan stated that while it 
understood this is not easy to calculate, it is of critical importance for Japan as it would be very hard for 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
28  
  
Japan to support the approach, without this PI. Although the paper states that a “skipjack management 
strategy evaluation has been developed”, Japan understood that MSE is a process, which should include a 
dialog. Stakeholders need the opportunity to give feedback, but that has not occurred, and Japan inquired 
what would happen in that regard. Japan noted the presenter’s suggestion that the harvest strategy process 
begin with skipjack in 2020. While understanding the difficulty in applying a multi-species approach, it 
inquired what the impact would be on outcomes for other species if this process began for skipjack, as there 
was the potential for unpredicted impacts on other species or ecosystems. Japan argued for the need to 
establish a multi-species approach over time. It agreed with PNG regarding the need for more stakeholder 
dialogue, and acknowledged that SPC was working on this, including discussing a possible workshop in 
Japan, and expressed its appreciation. It noted that the TRP combines biological and socioeconomic factors; 
for albacore the agreed value of 0.56 takes into account economic factors proposed by FFA members, and 
although high, Japan supported the level because it would mitigate the economic difficulties experienced by 
FFA members. Japan suggested that similar consideration should be given to the TRP for skipjack. Japan 
also asked whether allocation should be considered in the skipjack harvest strategy, noting that that of the 
IOTC does include allocation, and that some CCMs were opposed to this approach. Japan further inquired 
regarding how changes to SPC’s assumed historical distribution between different gear types (e.g., between 
longline and purse seine) would be handled, and whether this would force calculations to be done again. 
Japan closed by observing that CCMs probably have a general fear of what will happen if harvest strategy 
is pursued, and advocated for taking a slow approach, and ensuring all CCMs understand the process. The 
presenter stated that under the approach being used the harvest control rule (HCR) applies to the entire 
fishery, and scales up and down, assuming a constant distribution of fishing. If this changes slightly, it may 
have a minimal impact; however, significant changes in allocation could produce very different evaluation 
results. SPC’s expectation is that allocation changes would not change the HCR that was selected.  
142. 
Australia stated it remained optimistic that the harvest strategy approach would be productive, and 
these would need to be considered. Australia noted the comments by Japan regarding allocation and stated 
its position that the harvest strategy process is separate and distinct from the allocation process and should 
be run separately and in parallel. It noted it would discuss the multi-species issues separately. On behalf of 
FFA members Australia stated they remain committed and optimistic that the harvest strategy approach is a 
sound pathway to achieving collective objectives with a clear and long-term perspective, and that they stand 
ready to play their part in progressing this work and finding solutions. Australia noted that there were clear 
implications for updating the harvest strategy workplan, and the schedule of work for the coming years, that 
would need to be considered at WCPFC16. Australia stated that FFA members are increasingly conscious 
of the complexity of the issues that the Commission seeks to tackle through the harvest strategy approach, 
noting the need to understand the full implications of decisions. Australia stated that FFA members would 
share additional points as WCPFC16 progressed. 
143. 
The EU thanked SPC for their work, and agreed that the issue is complex, observing that not all 
members have same level of understanding. The EU highlighted that it is committed to the work and has 
supported it over time through voluntary contributions. It stated that given the complexity, doing harvest 
strategies for several species at the same time, including a multispecies approach, complicates the 
Commission’s work; other organisations have first focussed on a case study (single species fishery/stock 
approach), to allow everyone to understand the process before expanding to other species, while WCPFC is 
taking a different approach. The EU stated it did not see how this could be achieved while remaining fully 
engaged on all aspects. It noted that SPC had stated the process must be driven by members but suggested 
this was not currently the case because of the complexity and a lack of opportunities on the part of most 
CCMs to engage sufficiently with SPC on the process. The EU stated it would make suggestions during 
WCPFC16 on how to build capacity to enable CCMs to remain engaged. 
144. 
Chinese Taipei noted that despite several years with significant discussion of harvest strategies, the 
process remained complex and complicated, and difficult for many CCMs to understand. Chinese Taipei 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
29  
  
encouraged more engagement and education of stakeholders and stated that 4 years ago the Commission 
had chosen an interim Target Reference Point for skipjack which could serve as an example for other 
species. 
145. 
In response to an inquiry from the Chair, SPC stated there was an opportunity to further investigate 
TRPs for skipjack, and that this could be discussed later in the meeting. 
146. 
Kiribati, on behalf of PNA members commented in detail on progress on harvest strategies at SC15. 
They stated their view that while important progress has been made, the harvest strategy work was not going 
according to plan, and it was time to look carefully at the workplan. They noted that SPC’s comments and 
suggestions in WCPFC16-2019-09 were very helpful and agreed regrettably that it was unlikely that the 
2021 timing for the adoption of HCRs for bigeye and yellowfin would be met for a range of reasons. They 
noted that a review of the workplan was needed in part because some harvest strategy decisions produced 
the expected results, with the failure of the interim skipjack TRP being just one example. The PNA 
considered the outcomes to date as good experience before CCMs had committed to any harvest strategy 
decision-making processes. However, the experiences increased the awareness of PNA members regarding 
the uncertainty and complexity in the harvest strategy process, and their caution about committing to 
additional decisions without a clearer understanding regarding the results. PNA members stated they were 
moving to a more holistic view of the process and outcomes of harvest strategies, rather than dealing with 
individual elements sequentially; thus PNA members understanding that nothing is agreed until the whole 
package is agreed.  
147. 
The Chair noted that the workplan would be discussed under Agenda Item 6.7, following discussion 
of the species-specific aspects. 
148. 
Tuvalu, on behalf of the PNA, agreed with observation in WCPFC16-2019-09 that developing 
harvest strategies that will address multi-species aspects is more complex than originally expected and that 
was a primary reason for the need to extend some timeframes in the workplan. They noted that two important 
principles would affect the outcomes of the multi-species work: first the need for the Commission to avoid 
transferring a disproportionate burden from the outcomes of harvest strategies onto SIDS — given the 
current structure of the purse seine and longline fisheries, it is impossible to have a harvest strategy for 
bigeye that constrains purse seine effort without transferring a disproportionate burden onto SIDS, and 
therefore that kind of outcome will not be possible; and second the need for trade-offs between the 
achievement of TRPs for different stocks — it will not usually be possible to achieve all the TRPs, and 
mixed fisheries harvest strategies will likely lead to one or two stocks being fished above or below the TRP. 
Ultimately, the models need to be able to evaluate mixed fishery harvest strategies of this kind. 
149. 
Korea stated that it sought to implement a harvest strategy as soon as possible. It agreed with the 
concerns voiced by prior speakers, regarding complex, multi-species fisheries, and the resulting challenges 
that should be tackled by all members. It inquired when a harvest strategy for bigeye and yellowfin might 
actually be implemented, considering their complexity and the scheduled harvest strategy for skipjack in 
2021 (with bigeye and yellowfin scheduled for 2022 in the workplan). The Chair state that this was 
impossible to predict at present. 
150. 
China observed that WCPFC had not yet agreed to holding a science-management dialogue, with 
the result that harvest strategies were being discussed at WCPFC16. China stated it requires more time to 
understand the implications of the new approach. It agreed with the EU that any management measures 
should be driven by CCMs; noting Australia’s comment that harvest strategy should be pursued in parallel 
with allocation, China stated it could not devote sufficient time to do that. In general, it agreed with the PNA 
and Japan over the approach. At SC15, the conclusion was that more PIs are needed, but China stated it 
faces difficulty in providing the economic information needed for development of economic indicators. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
30  
  
China stated it needed more time to consider the harvest strategy scenarios and the positions of various 
CMMS.  
151. 
RMI stated that it had benefitted from capacity building in relation to harvest strategies, but that 
unfortunately there were new considerations that must be taken into account. It agreed regarding the 
complexity related to the consideration of new TRPs and a multi-species approach, including socioeconomic 
considerations, and noted that the workplan needed revision. RMI advocated for decisions to be made 
slowly, with allowance for differing capacity of CCMs accompanied by having the requisite resources to 
cater for those capacity building needs. RMI also noted the need to evaluate mixed fishery issues and looked 
forward to discussion of the workplan. 
152. 
Japan recalled its previous advice to proceed with great caution. It noted that as long as harvest 
strategies remain a conceptual exercise CCMs would not be able to see what will happen, and suggested 
proceeding with a specific species; if the outcomes are unacceptable, the Commission could return to the 
starting point and try again through an iterative process. Japan suggested taking the approach that nothing 
is agreed until everything is agreed, and stressed the need to examine specific species, candidate 
management procedures, and actions.  
153. 
FSM supported comments about capacity building and need for slow progress. It noted that SIDS 
economies are very dependent on fisheries and are just starting to see economic benefits. FSM stated that 
when HCRs are defined CCMs will be bound by these and stressed the need to ensure that the harvest 
strategy process will not have a negative impact on SIDS’ economies. FSM stressed the complexity of multi-
species, multi-gear fisheries, and stated there is much to take into account before making firm decisions.  
154. 
The Chair stated that elements for individual species would be discussed under Agenda Item 7. 
Australia volunteered to revise the harvest strategy workplan as the discussion proceeded. 
6.2 
Harvest Strategy Display Software 
155. 
Dr Finlay Scott (SPC-OFP) provided a presentation in reference to WCPFC16-2019-10 Using PIs 
to select a management procedure for skipjack and WCPFC16-2019-11 Using the PIMPLE software to 
explore skipjack PIs. He observed that developing a harvest strategy is a stakeholder-led process and 
stakeholder engagement is a key component of the approach. An important area of stakeholder engagement 
is the communication of results. When developing a harvest strategy, candidate management procedures 
(MPs) are evaluated using management strategy evaluation (MSE). Performance indicators are used by 
stakeholders to evaluate the expected relative performance and trade-offs between candidate MPs, allowing 
preferred MPs to be identified. Not all indicators will be of interest to all stakeholders and different 
stakeholders will likely focus on different sets of indicators depending on their priorities for the fishery. It 
is important that the results from the evaluations, including the indicators, are communicated to stakeholders 
in a way that allows them to select their preferred MPs. In evaluating WCPO tuna stocks, each PI will be 
calculated over three time periods (short-, medium- and long-term). Additionally, to reflect the uncertainty 
in the results each indicator reports a distribution of values rather than a single value (except for the 
probability-based indicators, such as the probability of SB/SBF=0 being above the LRP). Therefore, a lot of 
information can be presented through the PIs and other results from the MSE, making selecting a preferred 
MP difficult. For example, for the current preliminary results for the skipjack evaluations seven PIs are 
calculated and each indicator is calculated over the three time periods. This gives 21 indicators to consider 
for each candidate MP, nearly all of which are distributions rather than single values. As more MPs are 
evaluated and more indicators are included, the amount of information that needs to be communicated to 
stakeholders can become very large, potentially making it difficult to select a preferred MP. To assist in the 
communication of the evaluation results SPC is developing an interactive software tool: Performance 
Indicators and Management Procedures Explorer (PIMPLE). The aim is to facilitate the interactive 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
31  
  
exploration of the evaluation results, thereby making it easier to compare and evaluate the relative 
performance of candidate MPs. By selecting and deselecting from the list of available PIs and candidate 
MPs it is possible to “drill down” into the results. This makes it easier for each stakeholder to focus on the 
key indicators of interest and consequently identify their preferred MP. As different stakeholders have 
different preferences for how the results are presented, the tool includes a range of different plot types 
including bar charts, box plots, time series plots and radar plots, as well as summary tables. The development 
version of the tool is available online. To help stakeholders use PIMPLE, two reference sheets have been 
produced. One summarises the currently available PIs used in the skipjack evaluations, the other has an 
overview of how to use PIMPLE, including the different plot types that are available. These reference sheets 
are available through PIMPLE. 
156. 
 PNG acknowledged the work done by SPC to date and inquired whether this tool would be used in 
the in-country workshops, and if various harvest control rules (HCRs) (e.g., some with less drastic 
management responses than used in the examples previewed at WCPFC16) could be trialled. The presenter 
stated that PIMPLE was used in the last in-country workshop, and its use would continue. The HCRs were 
developed by SPC simply to explore the evaluation framework, and those currently in use were selected to 
offer contrasting results. He described the results displayed in PIMPLE as preliminary and stated that as 
work progresses SPC will seek for input from CCMs on trial HCRs.  
157. 
Indonesia inquired regarding selection of HCRs and MPs when using PIMPLE, observing that there 
were no options provided to select different MPs. The presenter stated that at present all use the same data 
collection and estimation model, which, with the HCR, are the elements that make up the MP. Alternative 
MPs will be examined in the future. For South Pacific albacore (where the HCR is driven more by CPUE), 
enabling the use of differing analytical methods will be much more important.  
158. 
Japan asked how the HCR would be affected when a new stock assessment model was employed. 
The presenter stated that SPC would recondition the current operating models using the current stock 
assessment. He noted that the HCR currently does not use either the 2016 or 2018 stock assessment model; 
it is similar to the 2016 model, but with different assumptions that make it more robust. He stated the same 
would be true for the management procedures.  
159. 
The EU wondered if it would be possible to have incompatible PIs when defining the model, which 
could produce bizarre results, because the PIs affect each other, and asked what could be done in such a 
case, and if this had to be taken into account when defining the model, or would be addressed when looking 
at the results? The presenter stated that this was related to the nature of trade-offs with regard to various 
indicators, and that it was unlikely a HCRs could be defined that would perform well across all indicators, 
meaning the trade-offs would always be present; he stated this trade-off process may not have been discussed 
in detail by the Commission.  
160. 
Kiribati inquired whether PIMPLE was being used with actual or theoretical data for skipjack or 
other stocks, stating it would prefer that actual data was used. The presenter stated that the results displayed 
to date related only to skipjack evaluations, but that the tool could also be used for South Pacific albacore. 
He noted that the historical results were all based on real data, but that 2015 was the last year with real data, 
but that this would be updated using the 2018 skipjack model. 
161. 
China stated that the current international price of tuna was very low and asked whether a PI 
reflecting the principle that fisheries should avoid oversupply was included, noting that most CCMs would 
be interested in including such an indicator. The presenter stated this was part of a broader discussion 
regarding what PIs various CCMs would be interested in using. He stated that it could be tricky to narrow 
down the underlying assumptions and associated calculations, but that it could be possible for SPC to work 
with FFA to develop some relevant PIs. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
32  
  
162. 
The Commission received a presentation from the Scientific Services Provider on the harvest 
strategy display software (PIMPLE) and encouraged CCMs to provide feedback to the Scientific Services 
Provider on the software. 
 
6.3 
Management Objectives 
163. 
The Chair stated that the Commission needed to review management objectives annually and 
inquired whether CCMs were comfortable with the management objectives that have guided the 
Commission to date with respect to modelling, noting the management objectives from CMM 2018-01. 
164. 
New Zealand, on behalf of FFA members, stated that they had concerns regarding the value of 
including discussions of management objectives and their associated PIs on the agenda, given that the 
Commission already had recorded its management objectives. It recognised that PIs may need to be adjusted 
as the Commission moves through harvest strategies, particularly depending on adopted TRPs, and that FFA 
members would like to discuss how best to align these topics within the Commission’s harvest strategy 
development process, including if it is even necessary to discuss these issues in the future. 
165. 
The United States observed that there is a disconnect between the recorded management objectives 
developed for the harvest strategy, which are a work in progress, and those already adopted objectives for 
the four main stocks, which are in effect through 2020 (the life of the tropical tuna CMM). The United States 
stated there are therefore two discussions: one regarding development of the objectives housed in the harvest 
strategies, and one regarding the objectives in the tropical tuna measure, which would be discussed in 2020, 
and become effective in 2021. The United States suggested that the current objectives in the tropical tuna 
measure could be somewhat outdated given that a good paper on minimum TRPs had recently been 
produced, which contained information that was critical to modification of the objectives for the next 
tropical tuna CMM. 
166. 
The EU agreed with the USA, reflecting that discussion of the two sets of objectives did tend to 
become mixed. It suggested that the management objectives in place were precautionary given the 
uncertainty in the stock assessment for the tropical tunas, although somewhat arbitrary. 
167. 
PNG, on behalf of the PNA, noted that it had been difficult to make progress on agreed management 
objectives and PIs, which was not surprising given CCMs’ diversity of interests. As a result, the list of PIs 
is longer than SPC would like for analysis, and different PIs are going to be important for different 
Commission members. PNG noted the importance of a PI related to disproportionate burden, which might 
not be important for single species harvest strategies but would be critical for the multi-species work. 
Without this indicator, a lot of work might be done on alternative management procedures that are simply 
not feasible for the Commission to adopt, because of the disproportionate burden implications. 
168. 
Indonesia stated its understanding that the management objectives in the tropical tuna measure are 
very broad, and stated it was difficult to address all management objectives, including the PIs. Indonesia 
suggested the need to prioritize which management objectives must be achieved, and to base the TRP on 
traceable, quantifiable scientific findings, although other factors may also contribute.  
169. 
The Chair stated that the Commission would bear in mind the comment by FFA members, and the 
observation by PNG (and the PNA) regarding the importance of considering disproportionate burdens, 
issues that also related to PIs.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
33  
  
170. 
The Commission reviewed the Management Objectives for tropical tunas contained in CMM 
2018-01 and for South Pacific albacore and considered that there was no need to review the Management 
Objectives on an annual basis, but they should be amended as required. 
 
6.4 
Performance Indicators and Monitoring Strategy 
171. 
The Chair noted that CCMs had raised various issues regarding Performance Indicators (PIs) in 
discussions under other agenda items, and that the Scientific Committee had reviewed various PIs for both 
skipjack (SC14-MI-WP-03) and South Pacific albacore (SC15-MI-WP-03).  
172. 
Nauru, on behalf of FFA members, stated their concern that there were no direct indicators that 
measure the economic impact on SIDS. They expressed concerns about relegating such an important issue 
to the monitoring strategy. FFA members inquired whether the Scientific Services Provider felt this was 
adequate to minimise the risk of adverse economic effects to SIDs by a particular candidate management 
procedure. They also expressed concern about the issue of subsidies being taken into account in the PIs, 
observing that is not done at present; one indicator does address maximising economic yield from the 
fishery, but is not necessarily helpful because some CCMs may affect their economic yield in other ways 
(e.g., by employing subsidies). 
173. 
Japan referenced its prior statement on the issue and observed that the specific PIs of interest to 
CCM should be included, but observed it is essential to be able to calculate the PIs. Japan noted that SPC 
has made efforts to calculate a range of PIs, including the disproportionate burden on SIDS, and impacts on 
small-scale fisheries, and that this is particularly important for multispecies fisheries. Japan suggested that 
CCMs assist SPC to develop ways to calculate specific PIs, whether through provision of data or sharing of 
ideas. 
174. 
Indonesia noted this is a very challenging process, and that data and papers considered by SC that 
inform how to achieve the management objectives and measure the PIs are based only on catch and effort 
data, and lack other data, including regarding economics. Indonesia stated that the Commission was better 
able to address biological and ecological aspects of fisheries than the socioeconomic aspects; it suggested 
that it may not be possible to assess all the PIs and management objectives and proposed the Commission 
should prioritize among the objectives. It suggested asking SPC which management objectives and PIs could 
be evaluated using available data.  
175. 
RMI, on behalf of PNA members, stated they consider the discussion on PIs and management 
objectives for the tropical tuna measure and harvest strategies to be separate, and that the outstanding success 
of the existing tropical tuna measure shows why the major elements of this measure should not be changed.  
176. 
China agreed with the statements by FFA and PNA. 
177. 
The United States commented that what is missing in the PI checklist is some reference to the 
economic viability of the fishery. This issue is not simply sustainable, healthy fish stocks, but also capacity 
and effort, as these impact the price of tuna and the economic viability of the fishery. In 2012 (a reference 
point for the viability of the fishery) skipjack sold for $2150/t; in 2019 the price was about $750/t. Central 
to the theme of PIs is economic modelling that includes many aspects that allow it to be profitable for vessels 
to catch fish. The United States observed the need to define the factors that help the fishery remain profitable 
and include these as PIs. 
178. 
The Chair summarised that CCMs agreed there is a clear distinction between management 
objectives and PIs, and that there is no need to review management objectives. Questions were raised over 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
34  
  
specific PIs and how these can be determined, and she noted Japan had proposed that members assist with 
provision of data. 
179. 
SPC stated that with the MSE framework for skipjack, the assumption is that changes in the level 
of fishing are proportional across the fleet: allocation is not currently examined, so impacts on distant water 
fishing nation (DWFN) or Pacific Island fleets are proportional. Under multispecies approaches 
disproportionate burden could be calculated. SPC discussed the PIs in papers prepared for SC and welcomed 
further data and assistance from CCMs as works continues. SPC stated it had developed proxies for 
economic indicators, total catch, and catch rates, but lacked a detailed understanding of the economic costs 
within the fishery; such costs are currently calculated at the aggregate fleet level. Therefore, any economic 
data from CCMs would be welcomed. SPC stated it currently does not look at price elasticity but this could 
be done. Economic indicators should be included in the monitoring strategy, because many outcomes depend 
on how allocations are made. Monitoring changes in PIs is important, as it allows CCMs to compare the 
actual outcomes verses the model projections. 
180. 
The Chair noted that some of these issues would be further addressed under Agenda Item 6.5. 
181. 
The Commission considered that it was important to consider economic indicators as 
performance indicators (PIs) and encouraged CCMs to assist the Scientific Services Provider by providing 
economic and other data to assist in development of PIs, including in relation to the disproportionate 
burden on SIDS, particularly with respect to multi-species fisheries. 
 
6.5 
 Management Strategy Evaluation 
182. 
Dr Rob Scott (SPC-OFP) presented WCPFC16-2019-09 An overview of progress in developing 
WCPFC Harvest Strategies, which reviews the proposed approach for developing a mixed fishery and multi-
species approach for the development of fishery-based harvest strategies. The approach has been devised to 
allow for the continued development of single species modelling frameworks for the four tuna stocks, which 
can be subsequently incorporated into a mixed fishery framework; this would investigate the implications 
of management procedures (MPs) for one stock on each of the other stocks. Under this approach, 
management procedures would be developed for skipjack, south Pacific albacore and bigeye tuna. Yellowfin 
tuna would not have a dedicated species-based MP. Rather, the impact on yellowfin tuna would be evaluated 
from the application of the combined MPs for skipjack, bigeye and South Pacific albacore to all fisheries 
that significantly impact yellowfin. This framework would be used to identify those MP combinations that 
have an acceptably high chance of achieving management objectives for all stocks, including yellowfin. 
While the proposed approach would not fully capture mixed fishery/mixed species interactions in an 
integrated framework (which would require multi-species MPs), it provides a staged approach for 
developing fishery-based harvest strategies from a collection of single species modelling frameworks. 
183. 
The Chair noted that the hierarchical approach introduced by SPC was endorsed by SC. 
184. 
Japan referred to the prioritisation in the “Combined Modelling Framework”, which depicts the 
skipjack MP affecting bigeye and yellowfin management, and noted that prioritisation of species is 
important, and that SC had not agreed to prioritise skipjack over bigeye and yellowfin management 
procedures. The presenter agreed regarding Japan’s understanding of the SC outcomes. 
185. 
Australia, on behalf of FFA members, noted that the SC endorsed the development of a hierarchical 
approach to dealing with multispecies harvest strategy issues and thanked SPC for their development of an 
example of a hierarchical approach that might meet this need. While some FFA members are not ready to 
endorse an approach that includes no management procedure for yellowfin, and need to understand the 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
35  
  
implications of these more clearly, they stated their recognition that this initial work was an exploratory 
analysis, and looked forward to further development. 
186. 
Vanuatu stated that it required more time to fully understand the concept of management procedures 
and hoped capacity building options would be available to facilitate this. It stated its understanding regarding 
the need for harvest control rules, and indicated it had been supportive of that work, but needed to ensure a 
similar level of comfort with the evaluation of management procedures through the management strategy 
evaluation process. 
187. 
PNG, on behalf of the PNA, thanked SPC for the large volume of work on the development of an 
MSE framework for skipjack, as reported in WCPFC16-2019-09. PNG stated that one of the elements that 
PNA members struggled with was the shift from the idea of testing alternative HCRs to testing alternative 
MPs. They stated their understanding was that the aim was not to adopt HCRs, as stated in the current 
workplan, but rather to adopt management procedures for each stock or fishery. PNG raised the following 
questions on this approach:  
i. 
Should the workplan be revised to refer to adopting management procedures instead of adopting 
HCRs? If so, PNA members suggested this may involve substantially more work and take longer 
than is currently provided for in the workplan.  
ii. As noted in WCPFC16-2019-09, various models may perform differently and CCMs will probably 
want to evaluate performance of models over time, which may take some time; would SPC agree 
with this assessment? 
iii. What information is available on the development of management procedures for other (non-
WCPFC) tuna stocks, in terms of the volume of work and the process for completing it? 
 
188. 
The presenter stated that under the workplan the intent had always been to develop management 
procedures for stocks, which comprises data collection methods to establish status, and HCRs. He noted that 
the discussion had focussed on HCRs, but the intention had always been to develop the management 
procedures. The shift to a multi-species framework and the additional work it requires may require changes 
to the harvest strategy workplan, with a second method to determine the status of a stock. The primary 
requirement of the model is that it tracks the status of the stock through time and gives a good estimate of 
stock status. He agreed that there could be a need to evaluate the estimation model further. Regarding the 
experience with the development of management procedures in other RFMOs (in terms of the work volume 
and process), he noted that this was a lengthy process — for example, southern bluefin tuna took several 
years.  
189. 
The EU thanked SPC, and supported continuation of the exploratory work.  It also expressed 
concerns about the lack of inclusiveness and opportunities of CCMs scientists to engage with SPC during 
the year (before SC) which is a fundamental requirement for such a process, especially noting that the work 
is expanding rapidly despite the concerns expressed by many CCMs for lack of time and opportunities to 
engage in this process.   
190. 
Japan noted that in ICCAT it was estimated that to develop a single species management procedure 
five 5-day meetings were needed.  
191. 
Indonesia acknowledged the process to address mixed fisheries, and noted the major catch figures, 
but observed that no specific procedures for yellowfin were proposed. For “other fisheries” the yellowfin 
catch is quite large, and Indonesia observed it will be important to develop specific yellowfin procedures in 
archipelagic waters; it looked forward to further consultations with SPC to develop such procedures. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
36  
  
192. 
FSM, on behalf of the PNA supported the SC15 endorsement of a hierarchical approach to 
developing a multi-species modelling framework, and agreed with the initial focus on developing a single 
species harvest strategy for skipjack, which would subsequently be incorporated into a mixed fishery and 
multi-species framework. The PNA reiterated their expectation that the framework would provide for an 
analysis of trade-offs between the achievement of TRPs for different stocks. SC15 was presented with some 
interesting examples of how these trade-offs are analysed in harvest strategy models for other multi-species 
mixed fisheries. Such models allow for analysis of the outcomes of different arrangements for making trade-
offs between the TRPs for different stocks. These include options for determining outcomes that maximize 
yields, or the value of yields, across the stocks as a whole. They stated their expectation that multi-species 
models would ultimately include consideration of schemes that would involve such a trade-off analysis. 
193. 
PNG stated that PNA members proposed that the workplan be considered an ‘Indicative’ Workplan 
so there is no sense of an obligation to meet the timelines. 
194. 
The Chair noted that the Commission requires time to provide guidelines in terms of the 
multispecies approach.  
195. 
The Commission agreed to task the Scientific Committee and the Scientific Services Provider 
with progressing work on a multispecies approach and to report back to the Commission. 
 
6.6 
Terms of Reference for a Management Dialogue 
196. 
The Chair noted WCPFC16-2019-12, Reference Document on Terms of Reference for Science-
Management Dialogue and encouraged CCMs to provide input on how to progress with harvest strategies 
in a way that would engage both scientists and managers. 
197. 
Kiribati, on behalf of FFA members, reaffirmed their view that the dialogue be held immediately 
after SC. They noted that the intent of the dialogue as initially recommended by SC was to progress more 
expeditiously harvest strategy work, but stated that its increasingly complex nature meant more time was 
needed to ensure that all CCMs fully understand the concepts. FFA members requested more targeted 
capacity building at the national level on the concepts for their managers, noting that the existing national 
workshops by SPC, particularly on harvest strategies, were relevant for this. They stated that many FFA 
members did not see the value of holding the dialogue in 2020, although they would be interested if the 
dialogue could be initiated in the form of capacity building exercises for all CCMs.  
198. 
The Chair stated that SPC had advised that they are working with CCMs through workshops and 
would visit CCMs to undertake capacity assistance in 2020–2021. She asked CCMs to provide input on how 
best to progress the harvest strategy (e.g., through an extended Commission meeting or via a workshop or 
other standalone meeting).  
199. 
Several members stated the extended Commission meeting was useful at WCPFC16 and gave 
tentative support for using the same approach in 2020 but noted the schedule would have to take into account 
the various working groups that were also planning to meet in 2020. Other mechanisms for enabling 
managers and scientists to interact, such as holding an extended pre-stock assessment workshop, or creating 
an electronic working group, were also suggested. The question was raised whether such a dialogue would 
make use of the TORs developed previously by the SWG, which had focussed on technical issues, and had 
envisioned a separate working group.  
200. 
PNG, on behalf of PNA members, supported the prior comment by Kiribati regarding the need for 
significant capacity building prior to holding such a working group. PNG noted that the PNA agreed to the 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
37  
  
Harvest Strategy Workplan on the basis that it would not require additional Commission bodies or meetings 
such as the science-management dialogue and would be integrated into the ongoing processes of the 
Commission. PNA members were reprioritising building their capacity to ensure they could participate 
effectively in the harvest strategy process and stated that they were not ready to engage in a separate science-
management dialogue.  
201. 
The EU stated the view that CCMs’ scientists should be able to interact intersessionally with SPC 
and failed to understand why this would be problematic for any CCMs. It referenced its proposal, as outlined 
elsewhere, including under Agenda Item 7.2.1.3.  PNG restated its view that capacity building would be 
needed to enable all CCMs to discuss these issues, because of its increasing complexity. Kiribati supported 
PNG’s statement, and stressed the need for national workshops before beginning processes such as the 
science-management dialogue. 
202. 
In reference to suggestions from the EU regarding alternative mechanisms for CCM involvement, 
SPC noted that the SPC’s pre-assessment workshop is designed to receive feedback to inform SPC’s stock 
assessments and would not be suitable for discussing MSE work. It suggested there would technical issues 
to consider prior to conducting an electronic working group. The EU reiterated its interest in enabling CCM 
scientists to be involved in the MSE work, which suggested it was a matter of sovereignty. The EU stated 
its desire to be involved on a regular basis and observed that other CCMs had the opportunity to interact 
with SPC throughout the year. SPC stated that it could look at technical approaches to enabling increased 
participation, and that it intends to make the code used for MSE work available to CCMs. It confirmed that 
the MSE process should be transparent, while being mindful that these are very technical issues, and some 
members would have more capacity to contribute than others. SPC stated it would look into ways CCMs 
and SPC could work together more closely and suggested the SC meeting could provide such an opportunity. 
203. 
Japan stated that it generally shared the concern expressed by the EU. It noted that with respect to 
typical stock assessments, some very technical discussions were held at the pre-assessment meeting, but 
with respect to MSEs — which are more complex — there is no opportunity for in-depth technical 
discussions with SPC experts. Results of the MSE work are reviewed at SC, but some CCMs feel the 
information presented is insufficient to evaluate what is being done. Japan observed that the more that CCMs 
feel uncomfortable, the slower the process will be; at a minimum CCMs should feel they have good access 
to information. Japan reiterated that there should be more inclusiveness in the MSE process than in the stock 
assessment process, and encouraged SPC to consider how to improve the situation. SPC observed there had 
been further requests for provision of additional information at SC and suggested it might be possible for 
SPC to work with colleagues at ISC to come up with a common approach to making these methods more 
transparent. 
204. 
Canada supported the comments by Japan and the EU, and noted the TORs developed by the 
working group were not for a management meeting, but for a joint meeting where all stakeholders are 
involved. Canada encouraged consideration of moving forward on a process such as that discussed at 
WCPFC15, if significant progress was to be made. 
205. 
The Ocean Foundation (TOF), on behalf of Pew, TOF, and WWF, stated that the Commission had 
committed itself to developing harvest strategies for key stocks or fisheries. Despite difficulty in reaching 
decisions on some elements of the harvest strategy approach that were scheduled for adoption in the 
workplan in 2019, there was significant detailed and productive discussion at WCPFC16, and TOF 
supported continuation of these discussions, stating that NGOs support capacity building in any form 
because harvest strategy work requires frank and open discussions among scientists and managers, and they 
need adequate time to focus on this work. They observed that for that reason both SC14 and SC15 
recommended creating a scientist-manager dialogue working group. Other RFMOs, such as NAFO, CCSBT, 
ICCAT and IOTC, are using or have used scientist–manager dialogue groups and found them essential to 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
38  
  
developing the harvest strategy process. TOF observed that CCMs agreed this work to be incredibly valuable 
to the future of the tuna fisheries in the WCPO, and stated that if such a body could not be created, the 
Commission should devote time and resources to continue to progress this work at WCPFC17, noting the 
discussions should continue, so as not to lose the momentum and consensus for the work that had been 
generated to date. 
206. 
RMI fully agreed on the need to continue the discussion on building capacity regarding efforts to 
manage these stocks. It reminded the Commission that CCMs that are SIDS and coastal states need 
additional time, given the increasing number and complexity of issues being discussed. It supported the 
statements by PNG, Kiribati and others, noting the need for building capacity. RMI stated it was very 
important for processes such as the science–management dialogue to involve those who play a major part 
in the fishery and observed most of the fishery was in the waters of coastal states who depend very highly 
on these resources. It stated that all decisions made on the stocks affect each SIDS inhabitant, and thus SIDS 
need to be able to participate effectively.  
207. 
The Commission noted that the Scientific Services Provider is planning to continue to undertake 
workshops for individual CCMs to build capacity on harvest strategies. 
 
6.7 
Review of Work Plan 
208. 
The Chair referenced WCPFC16-2019-IP02 Agreed Workplan for the adoption of Harvest 
Strategies under CMM 2014-06 and asked CCMs for their views on needed changes. 
209. 
The United States stated that it was clear that the workplan would need adjustment, certainly in 
terms of the schedule, but that it did not see the need for large structural changes. It noted Australia had 
taken the lead in drafting some revisions. The United States observed that in terms of terminology 
“management procedure” is a new term, not used in CMM 2014-06, and that perhaps the next version of the 
workplan can explain what management procedure means if the term will continue to be used. 
210. 
Japan noted its understanding that the Commission could proceed with skipjack management 
procedures, but establishment of a management procedure for skipjack did not mean it would be used, but 
rather that the Commission would then go on to address multi-species management procedures. This was 
confirmed by the Chair.  
211. 
Tokelau, on behalf of FFA members, stated that while the work plan was a critical document for 
guiding the Commission’s development of harvest strategies, it clearly needed to be reframed, because 
development of harvest strategies for WCPO stocks is an ambitious task, particularly given the complexities 
of intersecting stocks and fisheries. FFA members considered it important that the workplan addresses those 
complexities in a way that provides clear guidance to the Commission, but the workplan must also be 
realistic. FFA members noted that Australia had offered to help update the workplan to reflect decisions at 
WCPFC16 and encouraged all members to provide inputs to that revision so it would remain a useful guide 
for the Commission. 
212. 
PNG stated that it would be useful to frame the workplan as indicative, reflecting that some elements 
will change.  
213. 
New Zealand stated that the goals for harvest strategy capacity building were described in 
WCPFC16-2019-IP14 National Harvest Strategy Capacity Building Workshops for WCPO tuna fisheries. 
It noted that the workshops described were funded by New Zealand, and that the intention was not to include 
these in the workplan.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
39  
  
214. 
FSM on behalf of the PNA stated that on page 7 of WCPFC16-2019-09, SPC indicated that WCPFC 
remained on course for implementation of a single species harvest strategy for skipjack in 2020. However, 
PNA members stated that in their view it was not realistic to plan for completion of a skipjack harvest 
strategy in 2020. If a skipjack TRP was agreed at WCPFC16, it would still require a revision of the skipjack 
operating model and agreement on several elements of a skipjack management procedure; that work could 
take several years, especially taking into account that less progress is likely in 2020 because of the effort 
needed to renegotiate the tropical tuna CMM, thus making even 2021 an optimistic timeframe for a skipjack 
harvest strategy. In the absence of agreement regarding a revised skipjack TRP at WCPFC16, it almost 
certainly take longer than 2021 to complete the skipjack harvest strategy.  
215. 
The EU reiterated that priority in the workplan should be on skipjack. It also reminded CCMs it had 
made suggestions to increase the participation of CCMs in the MSE work and encouraged CCMs to consider 
these.  
216. 
The Chair observed that adoption of the harvest strategy would entail a long-term commitment by 
the Commission and stated that CCMs should take as much time as needed to consider capacity building 
and the special needs of members.  The Chair confirmed that would be Australia work in the margins of 
WCPFC16 to update the Harvest Strategy Workplan.    
217. 
After incorporating feedback and suggestions from CCMs, the Chair of the Harvest Strategy 
Workplan SWG (Australia) presented the Harvest Strategy Workplan. It was first developed in 2015, with 
an ambitious schedule, and was intended to be updated to reflect developments and progress. The workplan 
review planned for 2019 was intended to be thorough, and the SWG Chair stated CCMs had provided 
extensive comments, noting that CCMs were driving the process. The workplan is intended to be ambitious 
but realistic, and recognizes the need for time and capacity building, and learning from the collective 
experiences of CCMs. The SWG Chair thanked CCMs for their assistance with the update. 
218. 
PNG, on behalf of PNA members, stated they supported the FFA statement regarding WCPFC16-
2019-DP-01. They stated that the harvest strategy work had not gone according to plan in a number of 
important respects and required substantial amendments. Initial timeframes were clearly too short, and 
almost every element of the work is taking longer than in the initial plan, largely because the work is more 
complex than expected (and not because of a lack of effort by CCMs or SPC). In addition, the nature of 
some of the work has changed, the original goal was to adopt harvest control rules (HCRs)for each major 
stock, while now the goal is to adopt management procedures for each stock, which seems to involve 
reaching agreement on a monitoring strategy, the settings of the estimation model, and  HCRs. This could 
take several years even for skipjack, where progress has already been made. PNA members restated that 
2020 was not a feasible completion date for that work. In addition, PNG observed that some elements simply 
did not work — for example, the skipjack TRP must be revised and reformulated. These developments have 
made PNA members much more cautious about agreeing to any further decisions on any elements of the 
harvest strategy work until the likely implications and outcomes are better understood. PNA members 
asserted that the harvest strategy must be approached as a package, rather than separate elements, and 
stressed the need to build CCMs’ capacity to engage in the work and understand its implications. They noted 
that future sustainable development of PNA members was very heavily dependent on the tuna resources 
being managed. While harvest strategies can enhance the long-term value of those resources, PNA members 
cannot afford to take the risks associated with work on harvest strategies without being fully informed about 
the implications of the decisions that have to be made.  
219. 
China thanked the Chair of the SWG and supported the comments by PNG on behalf of PNA 
members. The EU thanked the SWG Chair for the updated indicative workplan, and suggested that in the 
future it might be possible to organise a SWG with interested CCMs to assist the SWG Chair with updates. 
The United States thanked the SWG Chair for their work, and made some specific drafting suggestions.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
40  
  
220. 
FSM, on behalf of PNA members proposed that the timeline for development of a skipjack 
management procedure be extended to 2022. They noted their prior hope that the timeline of 2021 for 
completion of a skipjack HCR could be maintained, but in supporting the FFA proposal for a revised 
skipjack TRP PNA members made it clear that failure to agree on a revised skipjack TRP would put that 
timeline at risk. However, they recognised that the questions raised about the FFA proposal were important 
and needed more consideration than possible at WCPFC16. In addition, as previously noted, the 
management procedure for skipjack has additional elements, as well as the harvest control rule. PNA 
members stated they found the advice of SPC and Japan provided at WCPFC16 on the experience in other 
RFMOs of development of management procedures daunting but very helpful. Consequently, PNA 
members regretfully concluded that it is likely to take longer than 2021 before the Commission can adopt a 
skipjack management procedure. PNA members stated they did not want to be bound by an unrealistic 
timeline for adoption of elements of the skipjack harvest strategy and could not agree to an unrealistic 
timeline of 2021, rather they could accept 2022, with the proviso that it may take longer. 
221. 
The Commission adopted the Updated Indicative Workplan for the Adoption of Harvest 
Strategies under CMM 2014-06 (Attachment H*). 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 7 — WCPO TUNA AND BILLFISH STOCKS  
7.1 
General overview of stock status (bigeye, skipjack, South Pacific albacore, yellowfin, Pacific 
bluefin, North Pacific albacore and North Pacific swordfish)  
222. 
Dr John Hampton (SPC-OFP) provided an overview of stock status, with reference to SC15 
outcomes on status of stocks and WCPFC16-2019-IP03_rev1 Western and Central Pacific Tuna 
Fishery:2018 Overview and Status of Stocks. The total catch of main tuna species in 2018 was approximately 
2.8 t, the second highest ever but within the range of catches over the past seven years. Purse seine catch in 
2018 was approximately 1.9 t. Effort, as measured in vessel days, has been lower since 2015 compared to 
the record level in 2014. Total catch has also been slightly lower over the same period. Purse seine CPUE 
shows a long-term increasing trend, and was particularly high for most of 2019, which will likely result in 
a record catch when all data are available. As in recent years, the purse seine catch is approximately equally 
distributed between associated and unassociated sets. Longline effort has tended to decline since 2012, and 
catch has also trended slightly downwards since 2010, primarily through reduced bigeye catches. CPUE of 
yellowfin and bigeye in the tropical longline fishery and albacore CPUE in the southern longline fishery 
have been stable or slightly increasing over recent years. None of the key tuna stocks in the WCPFC 
Convention Area are currently estimated to be overfished or experiencing overfishing, in contrast to other 
ocean areas. However, the spawning biomass in relation to unfished levels of all stocks has declined 
substantially over several decades as the fisheries developed, before stabilising, or increasing slightly, in the 
most recent years. All stocks are above the LRP with high probability, while skipjack and South Pacific 
albacore are slightly less than their respective interim TRPs. However, several other stocks of billfish (e.g. 
north and southwest striped marlin) and sharks (e.g. oceanic whitetip and silky sharks), as well as Pacific 
bluefin tuna are estimated to be either overfished, experiencing overfishing, or both. The recent evolution 
of the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) was reviewed, indicating that the WCPFC Convention Area 
continues to be in an ENSO-neutral state, with most forecasting models predicting maintenance of neutral 
conditions through the first half of 2020. Long term impacts of climate change continue to suggest overall 
negative impacts on skipjack, yellowfin and bigeye tuna in the WCPO, with projected eastwards 
displacement of these stocks towards the central and eastern Pacific, particularly in the second half of this 
century. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
41  
  
223. 
Tonga, on behalf of FFA members, thanked SPC for another comprehensive overview of the status 
of the four main tuna stocks, which shows that the WCPO produces over half the global supply of the larger 
tunas, and all four of the stocks that straddle the equator are sustainable.  
224. 
The EU noted that WCPFC has management based on a zoned approach and suggested it would be 
valuable to see graphics showing the catches inside and outside of the EEZs, as it would help understand 
the dynamics of the stocks and the fisheries. It also suggested it would be helpful to have additional graphs 
and tables on non-tuna species, including a figure showing the status of all species for all RFMOs. Regarding 
climate change, the EU inquired about the range and levels of uncertainties and how they are captured in 
the projections. SPC referred to Figure 17 of WCPFC16-2019-IP03_rev1, which displays (with orange 
shading showing 5% and 95% uncertainty) SPC’s best estimate of biomass, based on the use of a variety of 
models. SPC first estimates the impact of climate change on the oceans, and then projects the effect on tuna 
biomass. The uncertainty is quite high for some species, in particular albacore, which is driven by sensitivity 
to dissolved O2; climate models are not good at predicting dissolved O2.  
225. 
Palau, on behalf of PNA members, stated that the continuing positive status of the major stocks was 
a good reflection of the quality of the management arrangements in place for tropical tunas. They noted that 
while this was encouraging, there is more to be done to address the gaps and weaknesses in those 
arrangements. They also noted that there are some other important stocks, particularly bluefin, where the 
Commission record is very poor; for PNA members a major priority continues to be the need to strengthen 
arrangements for FAD management, because uncontrolled growth in FAD use remains the biggest threat to 
the sustainability of the major tropical tuna stocks, and PNA members give high priority to measures to 
improve information on FADs and FAD tracking in PNA waters. 
226. 
Japan stated that while the number of purse seine fishing days has decreased, catch has fluctuated, 
meaning that fishing vessels are likely becoming more efficient, and inquired (i) regarding the reasons for 
the increase, (ii) whether the number of sets was increasing, (iii) the effects of echosounder use, which is 
apparently increasing. SPC noted there was a very large increase in the number of free school sets starting 
in 2008, when WCPFC introduced a FAD closure. Vessels were then relearning how to set on free schools. 
A project at SPC funded by the EU is looking at detail at purse seine fishery evolution; SPC is seeing an 
increase in the number of sets per day, which increases CPUE based on number. FAD technological 
development is also a factor — vessels can select the most effective FADs, thereby increasing CPUE. 
227. 
Kiribati, on behalf of the PNA, thanked SPC for the presentation and for the continuing high quality 
of the regional fishery overview paper on which the presentation was based. PNA members supported the 
EU’s request relating to the breakdown of catches by national waters and high seas, stating this was 
important because of the importance for CCMs of trends in relation to high seas fishing, and of the relative 
balance of fishing between high seas and national waters.  
228. 
China noted all tuna species are in good health, which is not the case in other t-RFMOs. It agreed 
with the EU’s suggestion of the need for data to understand each CCM’s catch by year and species and 
inquired regarding linking stock projections with TRPs and harvest strategies.  
229. 
SPC noted that detailed annual information on fishing distribution and catch statistics by CCM are 
published in the WCPFC Tuna Fishery Yearbook, and that these include aggregate distributions. Stock status 
in relation to LRPs and TRPs is provided in the detailed stock assessment documents.  
230. 
The EU highlighted that the aggregated information should be broken down and catch and effort 
data displayed to CCMs, in order to enable a comprehensive understanding of the state of the fisheries and 
the impact of the Conservation and Management Measures in force.   
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
42  
  
231. 
RMI on behalf of PNA members thanked SPC for the chart on the status of stocks managed by 
different RFMOs, and noted the information relating to climate change. RMI asked SPC to confirm their 
understanding that yellowfin stocks managed by other t-RFMOs were overfished or subject to overfishing 
and all bigeye stocks were in the same state. SPC indicated that it directly reports what the scientific bodies 
of other t-RFMOs have reported. The reasons for the WCPO’s healthy stocks include the large component 
of the WCPFC fishery composed of skipjack, and the proportion of FAD verses free school catch (50/50); 
purse seine fisheries with a high FAD content will have a greater effect on yellowfin and bigeye. PNG 
inquired further on how estimates of stock status in other t-RFMOs was calculated. SPC stated that these 
reflect the standards used in those RFMOs. Not all use 20% SBF=0 (e.g., limits in the EPO are related to 
MSY, or a fraction thereof). Japan stated that other t-RFMOs sometimes use MSY as a borderline between 
these categories, and that it was not possible to simply compare stock status directly between t-RFMOs. 
232. 
Indonesia noted (i) the higher uncertainty for South Pacific albacore compared to skipjack, and 
inquired whether this had been incorporated into the harvest strategy models; (ii) the low number of model 
scenarios for South Pacific albacore (24) verses skipjack (288); and (iii) the issue of dissolved O2, and 
increased uncertainty for South Pacific albacore, and inquired whether uncertainty related to environmental 
factors would be included in the operating model for the MSE work. SPC stated that albacore differs in that 
most (90%) is exploited as large adult fish by the longline fishery, with only a small troll fishery around 
New Zealand, which means that SPC’s data are less informative (there is a lot of tag data for tropical tunas, 
but not for albacore); this contributes to the uncertainty for albacore. SPC is considering how environmental 
impacts can be taken into account in the MSE, possibly using the Spatial Ecosystem and Populations 
Dynamics Model (SEAPODYM).  
233. 
New Caledonia noted that 2019 was the third year of decline in its albacore catch. It has only 20 
longline vessels fishing in its EEZ, with historically very low fishing pressure, but overall catch trends are 
down (30% in 3 years), including a 15% reduction in albacore, and the industry is suffering economically, 
and New Caledonia requested insights from SPC. SPC indicated it would follow up directly with New 
Caledonia. PNG asked how to reconcile the decline in stocks in New Caledonia, as reflected by their 
comment, and the possible 50% increase in albacore is projected over the next 50 years, based on climate 
change projections.  
234. 
RMI stated that that the indications of overfishing from other t-RFMOs provided an incentive for 
WCPFC to adopt the precautionary approach, while recognizing the need to be cautious in how overfishing 
is compared between regions.  
Northern stocks  
 
235. 
Dr S. Nakatsuka (Chair of the ISC Pacific Bluefin Working Group) provided an introduction 
regarding the work of the ISC. He introduced general information regarding the stock status and catch of 
the northern stocks; North Pacific albacore catch was stable or declining in the last two decades, with the 
primary catch taken by Japan; Pacific bluefin tuna stocks have declined, and catch is low, with protective 
measures in place; and swordfish stocks are stable. He also referenced the stock assessments being 
conducted by ISC.  
236. 
In response to a query from the EU regarding supplementary information, the ISC WG Chair and 
the Chair noted that WCPFC16-2019-22, -23 and -24 and WCPFC16-2019-IP10 and -IP11 had been 
prepared as reference documents for WCPFC16. The EU indicated that these documents were useful but 
some information was missing and that it would share with Secretariat what additional information it was 
seeking. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
43  
  
237. 
 The EU stated that the presenter mentioned that there are no reference points defined for the 
Commission that allow the ISC to derive stock status, and suggested where there is no defined reference 
point, that the default reference point defined by the Convention (MSY) should be used. In response ISC 
WG Chair stated that the evaluation was conducted against FMSY as one of 7 reference points, to provide as 
much information as possible.  
238. 
The United States stated its understanding that there is no automatic MSY-based limit if the 
Commission has not adopted a limit reference point. It noted that it is very useful to have status against 
potential reference points examined, and voiced appreciation for how this was done by ISC. The United 
States stated that if MSY-based objectives are important for any CCMs, they should be among the potential 
candidates, as done by ISC.  
239. 
Palau inquired how the bluefin stock could be rebuilding when there is still overfishing. Japan 
indicated that given a rebuilding target and projection, all that is possible is to take uncertainty into account, 
implement measures, and observe the results; with targets and measures it is necessary to see the 
interactions. SPC observed that some of the confusion on the part of CCMs regarding Pacific bluefin tuna 
is that there is a rebuilding strategy but overfishing is continuing, which raises the question of how these 
can be reconciled. The ISC WG Chair stated he is often asked this by fisheries managers: how can a stock 
rebuild when fishing mortality is over MSY? This can happen if stock levels are very low, but fishing 
mortality is lower than current biomass can support; as stock levels increase and catch level is maintained, 
the stock can rebuild, even given small increases in fishing mortality. Japan observed that despite the stock 
being shown to be overfished with overfishing occurring, stock size has been increasing since 2010, with 
the stock assessment indicating recovery will take place more rapidly than originally projected. Japan 
suggested ISC should consider altering the description so as to reduce confusion. The ISC WG Chair stated 
that the same could happen with any species covered by SPC stock assessments. He emphasised Kobe charts 
provide a snapshot but can be used with a threshold to indicate whether a stock is recovering; projections 
are useful as they provide an idea, albeit uncertain, of the future trend. 
240. 
The EU noted that the discussion was very illustrative of how differently various CCMs understand 
key concepts regarding the status of the fisheries and the MSE framework. Regarding the United States’ 
intervention, the EU stated its understanding that the use of the reference point was not as a limit, but a 
benchmark for understanding stock status. The EU stated that for all tuna stocks MSY is used in Kobe plots 
as a benchmark and suggested that this should be done for bluefin as it is for other species.  
7.2 
Bigeye, Skipjack and Yellowfin 
7.2.1 
Harvest Strategy Issues 
7.2.1.1 Review of target reference point for skipjack 
241. 
Dr Graham Pilling (SPC-OFP) presented WCPFC16-2019-14, Current and Projected Stock Status 
of WCPO Skipjack Tuna to Inform Consideration of an Updated Target Reference Point, which describes 
the 2019 assessment of WCPO skipjack tuna agreed at SC15. It incorporates new information on skipjack 
biology and improved model settings similar to how the assessment of WCPO bigeye tuna performed in 
2017 changed the perception of stock status and productivity compared to previous assessments. The paper 
also presents results of analyses requested by SC15 based upon the 2019 assessment to assist WCPFC16 in 
its review of the performance of the interim skipjack tuna TRP. Those analyses indicate changes in effort 
and biomass from 2012 and ‘recent’ levels, and median equilibrium yield (as a proportion of MSY) 
associated with strategies that maintain a median of spawning biomass depletion (SB/SBF=0) of 40%, 45%, 
50%, and 55%. These are compared to results under 2012 ‘baseline’ fishing levels. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
44  
  
Table 7.2.2.1: Median skipjack tuna depletion levels (SB/SBF=0) and corresponding change in biomass 
from 2012 and 2015-18 average levels, change in purse seine effort (scalar), median equilibrium yield 
(total yield as % of MSY) and risk of falling below the LRP under baseline fishery conditions (shaded 
row) and for SC15-nominated depletion levels.  
Median 
depletion 
level 
(%SBF=0) 
Change in 
spawning biomass 
(%SBF=0) from 
2012 levels 
Change in spawning 
biomass (%SBF=0) 
from 2015-2018 
average 
Change in 
PS effort 
from 2012 
levels* 
Median total 
equilibrium 
yield (%MSY) 
Risk 
SB/SBF=0 
< LRP 
55% 
+31% 
+25% 
-40% 
62% 
0% 
50% 
+18% 
+13% 
-25% 
69% 
0% 
45% 
+7% 
+3% 
-13% 
74% 
0% 
42% 
-2% 
-5% 
0% 
84% 
0% 
40% 
-5% 
-9% 
+5% 
89% 
0% 
* ‘2012’ conditions as described in the main text. No future ‘effort creep’ assumed, i.e. CPUE is assumed proportional 
to abundance. 
 
242. 
Chinese Taipei addressed three issues: (i) the effect of effort creep, noting this was discussed in 
2018, and stating that this has implications for understanding trends in fishing effort, with increases possibly 
related to technical improvements to existing vessels, or the addition of vessels. Chinese Taipei asked how 
much effect SPC considered this would have on the results. (ii) Regarding the baseline year (Fig 2. of the 
paper), the stock level in 2012 was much lower than in the 2014 stock assessment. The 2012 level in the 
new stock assessment is very close to lowest level of whole series. Chinese Taipei asked if it was still 
suitable to use 2012 as a baseline level for choosing a TRP? (iii) Chinese Taipei referenced (in Fig 2) the 
new stock assessment historical trend, which appears different from that presented by Dr John Hampton 
under Agenda item 7.1, and inquired why this was the case. The presenter replied (i) that effort creep is very 
hard to estimate. In WCPFC16-2019-14 SPC assumes it is not happening in the future, which is OK for a 
TRP. The question is then how management adjusts if effort creep is detected and conditions diverge from 
the TRP in the future. The approach is to manage around the TRP in the face of uncertainties such as effort 
creep. (ii) Regarding the baseline year: the lowest level identified in a particular year is 41%. The level in 
2012 was 42%. The decision regarding suitability for defining a TRP depends on whether this gives what is 
desired in terms of the social and economic aspects. (iii) For Fig. 2, the historical trend is different between 
models, probably because of the settings in the 2019 stock assessment. The difference with what was shown 
under Agenda item 7.1 is that it represents instantaneous depletion in one year relative to an unfished 
condition in that year, while the TRP is in relation to the previous 10 years; the figures and projections are 
consistent with how SPC would calculate the TRP. 
243. 
Japan suggested the need to separate issues to be decided by the Commission and those that should 
be the focus of conversations with SC or SPC. Japan agreed that the TRP needs to be decided by the 
Commission, but raised the question whether the explanation was scientifically justifiable. Japan recalled 
that it previously posed several questions about effort creep, and the answers from SPC suggested there 
could be some increase in the number of sets per day, and possibly increased CPUE as a result of 
echosounder use. SPC had indicated it was trying to assess this, and Japan stated it looked forward to 
receiving that information, but that it was difficult for the Commission to make an informed decision 
regarding a TRP if effort creep is hard to identify and estimate, and is to be left up to the Commission to 
react to over time. Japan stated that given that vessels are becoming more efficient, assuming unchanging 
effort over 30 years is not a precautionary approach. Japan agreed that the decision regarding the use of 
2012 as a baseline is up to the Commission and stated that if the existing TRP of 50% depletion ratio should 
be automatically converted to 42%, that would be acceptable. SC had stated that because the median 
spawning biomass has been below the TRP, the Commission should take measures to ensure this fluctuates 
around 50%; that is now 42%, and thus not in agreement with the SC recommendation, and Japan stated it 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
45  
  
should be addressed again by SC. In addition, Japan noted that additional discussion was needed regarding 
changing the model maturity schedule so it could be compared directly with 2012. SPC stated it does not 
have a good estimate of how effort creep is impacting effective effort in the purse seine fishery, which is 
proving very difficult to estimate, and making it very hard to project what will happen in the future. The 
effective effort on the stock will go up with effort creep, resulting not in a level of 42%, but an even lower 
number. This is not included because if a stock size equivalent to the 2012 stock levels is desired, and effort 
creep is present, it will be necessary to lower F to maintain the stock. SPC stated it would be happy to engage 
with Japan on the modelling issues, which are also discussed in an appendix to the paper. 
244. 
Solomon Islands, on behalf of PNA members, stated that in DP01, FFA members proposed an 
approach to reformulating the TRP following SC’s advice: the TRP would be the spawning biomass 
depletion ratio consistent with the level of fishing effort for skipjack in 2012, and the condition of the 
skipjack stock in 2012. This percentage is estimated in the 2019 assessment at 42%. They acknowledged 
that this was a new approach that CCMs would need time to consider seriously because it was likely the 
Commission would need a similar approach for other TRPs.  
245. 
 New Zealand, on behalf of FFA members, noted that under the new skipjack stock assessment 
model, a spawning biomass depletion ratio of 42% is projected to achieve roughly the same outcomes as the 
50% TRP was projected to achieve when it was adopted in 2015. FFA members stated they sought to avoid 
the need to revise the TRP in the future to reflect changes in the assessment model and model results not 
related to the state of the stock. SC pointed to the value of using a clearly stated reference period as the 
baseline for a skipjack TRP, comparable to the approach used for the South Pacific albacore TRP agreed in 
2018. Therefore, FFA members suggested that the skipjack TRP be framed along the following lines as 
outlined in DP1 that: the target reference point for the WCPO skipjack tuna stock shall be the percentage of 
the estimated recent average spawning biomass in the absence of fishing (SBF=0, t1-t2), calculated as the 
median across the grid of models agreed by the Scientific Committee, that is consistent with the level of 
fishing effort for skipjack in 2012 and the condition of the skipjack stock in 2012. This percentage is 
estimated in the 2019 assessment as 42%. 
246. 
The United States concurred that effort creep assumptions should not be included in the stock 
assessment; referencing changes in purse seine catchability, the United States inquired if there was a better 
year to use than 2012 as a reference year.  
247. 
China raised the following issues (i) inquired if climate change impacts (on recruitment and 
distribution) were considered; (ii) stated if a TRP of 42% was used, this would mean increasing fishing 
effort by 16%, and inquired if this would negatively impact juveniles; and (iii) observed that skipjack prices 
were sharply down, possibly because of oversupply, and suggested that increased effort may not be wise. 
The presenter stated that (i) climate change has not been factored into the projections. Similar to effort creep, 
it is very hard to know the impacts of climate change, as the key impacts start around 2050, beyond the time 
range examined. (ii) Regarding increasing the level of fishing relative to the more recent period, a 12% 
increase would maintain stock at 42%, but the pattern of effort has fluctuated, making it hard to know if this 
will be constant. Juveniles are taken largely through FAD sets, and the impact of increased effort on 
juveniles would depend on the proportion of FAD sets. (iii) Regarding oversupply, he stated it was not 
known if this is due to oversupply in the global market.  
248. 
The EU stated that this was a mechanical process, and that there was no need to alter the limits and 
management, as fishing conditions could be maintained with no impact on the stock. The EU stated that 
catch would have to be reduced to keep the TRP at 50%, which was not justified, because the stock is 
exploited sustainably. The EU supported New Zealand’s position, and suggested the TRP be adapted to fit 
the new data. It noted purse seine efficiency is improving, which is normal because of technological 
development. Limits are based on fishing days, and as a fishing day becomes more efficient, the limit will 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
46  
  
become risky. The EU suggested there may be a need to change the methodology used to limit the fishery, 
which would impact allocation discussions.  
249. 
Indonesia raised three issues namely (i) stated that the skipjack Majuro plot in the 2019 stock 
assessment uses different year ranges for spawning biomass (2015–2018) and the ratio of fishing mortality 
(2014–2017), and asked why; (ii) inquired why recent biomass and fishing levels are considered over a 4-
year period, rather than a longer period (e.g. 5 years); and (iii) regarding Table 2 (change in purse seine 
effort from 2012 levels), Indonesia noted the wide range of fishing effort, and inquired whether this 
considered only fishing days, or other factors as well? The presenter stated that (i) SC used the last 4 years 
of the stock assessment for SB because the last year’s data was acceptable, but that was not the case for 
fishing mortality, so the earlier period was used; (ii) the 4-year period for the TRP was decided by SC, and 
avoids yearly fluctuations; and (iii) regarding effort, in 2019 SPC switched from fishing days to fishing sets, 
which produce roughly equivalent results in the current data. Indonesia further inquired whether the tables 
provide targeting for purse seine operating in the high seas only or include others areas (EEZs), and whether 
small purse seine fisheries were included? The presenter stated that SPC manipulated the effort in the key 
industrial purse seine fisheries in the stock assessment model; both EEZs and high seas areas are included, 
and the industrial purse seine fisheries operating in those areas. 
250. 
 PNG stated that the interim TRP for skipjack was to progress the work on the harvest strategy, and 
is doing what was expected, and achieving the desired conditions. PNG suggested this view was likely 
supported by most delegations. PNG thanked the presenter and the team at SPC for their work, which was 
exactly what SC asked that they present. 
251. 
The United States stated that the value of the fishery is one objective, and that there is a need to 
recognize the close connection between effort, catch and price. It noted that the price has recently crashed 
and is not sustainable. It looked forward to working with other CCMs to set an appropriate TRP. 
252. 
Australia stated that it lacks an active skipjack fishery and thus was making its intervention from a 
scientific and technical perspective. As outlined by New Zealand on behalf of the FFA, Australia was 
lending further support to the FFA proposal to rescale the interim skipjack target reference point and tie it 
to a particular year rather than a fixed biomass, which would bring skipjack into line with the approach taken 
for the albacore TRP and that taken for the yellowfin and bigeye management objectives within the tropical 
tuna measure. Australia affirmed that each new stock assessment serves to update and improve the 
Commission’s understanding of stock status; this is the case with the latest skipjack assessment and was the 
case with other recent assessments (e.g., South Pacific albacore and bigeye). In each case the understanding 
of historical biomass levels has changed substantially with the most recent assessment. The FFA proposal 
reflects updated understanding of skipjack biomass levels and also seeks to “future-proof” the reference 
point against future stock assessments outcomes. 
253. 
Nauru, on behalf of PNA members, thanked Japan for sharing their ideas on the revised skipjack 
TRP, and expressed disappointment that Japan couldn’t support the FFA approach, stating that while they 
could understand Japan’s position, it was not the way FFA saw harvest strategies working. The aim of a 
harvest strategy is to have in place a stable means to keep the stock near the TRP, with effort fluctuating 
around the level associated with the TRP. FFA members expressed the hope they could work with Japan to 
find a way forward. Japan stated that it had not addressed the TRP, but rather the SPC presentation. It noted 
that there had not been an agreement “that the new 42% is equivalent to the old 50%”, and suggested that 
given the series of questions posed, against some assumptions made, the matter should be discussed at SC.  
254. 
Kiribati, on behalf of PNA members thanked China and Chinese Taipei for their questions regarding 
the FFA proposal for the revised TRP. They stated some questions could require further work by SPC and 
other CCMs and looked forward to making progress on those issues.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
47  
  
255. 
The EU inquired regarding the suggested tasking to SC, and what that would bring to the discussion. 
Japan stated its concerns regarding the assumptions, and whether this was a purely mechanical conversion. 
It reiterated its need to ensure the assumptions are valid.  
256. 
China noted that the impact on the juvenile catch from an increase in effort depends on the 
proportion that is associated with FADs. China stated it would assume that if total effort increases by 12% 
there will be an equivalent impact on the juvenile catch. 
257. 
The Chair noted that a number of members expressed a preference for a TRP based on a median 
depletion level of 42% of SB F=0 in 2012. But some CCMs expressed concern whether this is indeed a simple 
mechanical exercise, and are concerned over the impact on juveniles.  
258. 
The Commission requested the Scientific Committee to provide advice on:  
a. 
the formulation of TRPs for skipjack tuna, noting:  
i. the SC15 advice on a skipjack tuna TRP “that the Commission may identify a 
reference year, or set of years, which may be appropriate to use as a baseline 
for a skipjack TRP.”; and  
ii. the approach to the formulation of a skipjack tuna TRP proposed in 
WCPFC162019-DP01; and  
  
b. 
effort creep estimated in relation to the TRPs.  
  
259. 
The Commission also requested the Scientific Service Provider to revise WCPFC16-2019-15 
using candidate revised interim skipjack TRPs of 42%,44%, 46%, 48% and 50% of SB/SBF=0. 
 
7.2.1.2 Target reference point for bigeye and yellowfin 
260. 
Dr Rob Scott (SPC-OFP) presented WCPFC16-2019-15, Minimum Target Reference Points for 
WCPO yellowfin and bigeye tuna consistent with alternative LRP risk levels, and multispecies implications 
(an update of SC15-MI-WP01). The paper re-presents median levels of spawning biomass depletion 
(SB/SBF=0) for bigeye and yellowfin tuna that are consistent with specified risk levels of breaching the LRP 
of 0.2SBF=0. The results are summarised in the tables below. Those tables present values of SB/SBF=0 that, 
if achieved on average, are predicted to result in the specified levels of risk of breaching the LRP, and thus 
may be interpreted as minimum levels of SB/SBF=0 consistent with specific risk levels. The outcomes 
associated with achieving the different risk levels, and the associated consequences for other stocks, were 
investigated and compared against the objectives of CMM 2018-01. The analyses were conducted across 
the uncertainty framework defined for the most recent assessments of yellowfin (2017), bigeye (2018) and 
skipjack tuna (2019). 
 
 
 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
48  
  
Table 7.2.1.2a: Median levels of long-term yellowfin tuna SB/SBF=0 for the four nominated levels of 
risk of breaching the LRP, and the stock level and risk under 2013-15 average fishing levels. Status 
of bigeye and skipjack stocks (SB/SBF=0) under those conditions also presented in the final three 
columns. Shading indicates stock status relative to CMM 2018-01 objectives (dark grey = clearly not 
achieved; light grey = approximately achieved; clear = achieved). 
 
Risk 
level 
Yellowfin results 
Bigeye SB/SBF=0  
Skipjack 
SB/SBF=0  
SB/SBF=0 
Scalar (relative 
to 2013-15 
average 
conditions) 
SB/SBF=0 
relative to  
SB2012-15/SBF=0 
Recent 
recruitment 
Long term 
recruitment 
 
5% 
0.34 
0.95 
1.02 
0.42 
0.31 
0.43 
Fishing @ 2013-15 
average 
7% 
0.33 
1.00 
0.99 
0.42 
0.30 
0.41 
 
10% 
0.32 
1.05 
0.96 
0.39 
0.29 
0.40 
 
15% 
0.30 
1.12 
0.91 
0.37 
0.27 
0.39 
 
20% 
0.28 
1.20 
0.84 
0.35 
0.26 
0.38 
 
Table 7.2.1.2b: Median levels of long-term bigeye tuna SB/SBF=0 for the four nominated levels of 
risk of breaching the LRP, and stock level and risk under 2013-15 average fishing levels, under two 
future stock recruitment hypotheses (“recent” and “long-term”). Status of yellowfin and skipjack 
stocks (SB/SBF=0) under those conditions also presented in the last two columns. Shading indicates 
stock status relative to CMM 2018-01 objectives (dark grey = clearly not achieved; light grey = 
approximately achieved; clear = achieved). 
“Recent” recruitment  
 
Risk 
level 
Bigeye results 
Yellowfin 
SB/SBF=0 
Skipjack 
SB/SBF=0 
SB/SBF=0 
Scalar (relative to 
2013-15 average 
conditions) 
SB/SBF=0 relative 
to  
SB2012-15/SBF=0 
Fishing @ 2013-15 
average 
(0%) 
0.42 
1.00 
1.18 
0.33 
0.41 
 
5% 
0.33 
1.23 
0.93 
0.28 
0.38 
 
10% 
0.30 
1.33 
0.85 
0.26 
0.36 
 
15% 
0.29 
1.4 
0.82 
0.25 
0.35 
 
20% 
0.28 
1.46 
0.79 
0.24 
0.35 
“Long-term” recruitment 
 
Risk 
level 
Bigeye results 
Yellowfin 
SB/SBF=0 
Skipjack 
SB/SBF=0 
SB/SBF=0 
Scalar (relative to 
2013-15 average 
conditions) 
SB/SBF=0 relative 
to  
SB2012-15/SBF=0 
 
5% 
0.38 
0.80 
1.07 
0.38 
0.47 
 
10% 
0.34 
0.89 
0.96 
0.35 
0.44 
 
15% 
0.32 
0.97 
0.90 
0.33 
0.42 
Fishing @ 2013-15 
average 
17% 
0.30 
1.00 
0.84 
0.33 
0.41 
 
20% 
0.29 
1.06 
0.82 
0.31 
0.40 
 
 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
49  
  
261. 
Japan stated that the approach examines the level of risk of breaching the LRP, and then determines 
the TRP, but observed that the TRP includes non-biological factors. Japan expressed concern about the 
current stock level, although in the “green zone”, because fishing is not currently economically viable for 
some longline fishing vessels. Japan stated it had made some investigation about what level is more 
appropriate by looking at the historical level of the stock, and suggested one approach would be to use the 
2000–2005 depletion level, when the Japanese fleet was able to operate successfully. This would result in a 
TRP of 0.41 SB/SBF=0 for BET. However, a problem remains in terms of which scenario will be used for 
recruitment, with many cases where the result of the stock assessment diverges because of differing 
recruitment. Japan inquired what SPC was suggesting in this regard. The presenter stated that the impact of 
different recruitment levels is given in Table 2 of the paper. The recommendation from SC is that more 
recent recruitment is the preferred option, but SPC also had requests from CCMs that other scenarios be 
considered.  
262. 
Solomon Islands, on behalf of FFA, noted that as stated by FFA to WCPFC15, an important purpose 
for TRPs is to maintain stocks above levels where there is a very low risk of breaching the LRP, consistent 
with the guidelines in the UNFSA; and secondly, preferably achieve modest increases to SB/SBF=0 compared 
to recent levels in order to support ongoing economic management of the purse seine fishery and facilitate 
development opportunities for SIDS longline fisheries. Generally, FFA members are comfortable with the 
state of the skipjack and bigeye stocks but see some possible future issues with yellowfin, especially given 
significant impact on yellowfin juveniles by Indonesian small-scale fisheries, where there are some large 
uncertainties, and this may need extra consideration with respect to a yellowfin TRP. FFA members 
welcomed the views of other CCMs on this issue. However, due to the high importance of these fisheries to 
the economies of most FFA members, they stated more time would be needed to consider the economic 
implications of any TRP decisions, and stated that therefore TRPs could not be agreed during WCPFC16. 
FFA members expressed their strongly held view that current objectives for yellowfin and bigeye tuna in 
the Tropical Tuna CMM be maintained. 
263. 
Korea stated that in setting TRPs for bigeye and yellowfin all these considerations are necessary, as 
mentioned in WP15, but it may not be possible to achieve them simultaneously for all species. Korea 
suggested giving priority to the species with the lowest estimated TRP.  
264. 
FSM on behalf of PNA members thanked SPC for the analysis and supported the statement made 
by Solomon Islands on behalf of FFA. They noted that this was another critically important issue for the 
Commission and PNA. They noted with regret they could not support the adoption of bigeye and yellowfin 
TRPs at WCPFC16, as a result of (i) the need for economic analysis of the implications; (ii) uncertainty 
about the skipjack TRP and the need to formulate these TRPs using a specific reference period; and (iii) 
new assessments of bigeye and yellowfin will be prepared in 2020, with possible implications for the TRPs. 
WCPFC16-2019-15 will then need to be updated to take into account the results of these assessments and 
a revised skipjack TRP. FSM looked forward to progress on the work in 2020, to the extent allowed by the 
need to spend time on the tropical tuna CMM. 
265. 
 Chinese Taipei suggested that, as TRP determination involves multi-fisheries, stocks and objectives 
trade-offs, the minimum values (SB/SBF=0 is to be maintained at or above the average SB/SBF=0 for 2012–
2015), as specified in CMM 2018-01 paragraphs 12 (for bigeye) and 14 (for yellowfin), could be used as 
the interim minimum TRPs, which could be refined in the future.  
266. 
The United States stated that the information in the paper was very informative for setting TRPs, 
but emphasised that TRPs should ideally include social and economic objectives. The United States 
referenced the TRPs proposed by Japan and FFA, and indicated the United States would be happy to 
consider those and others. The United States noted the Commission had tasked itself with revisiting the 
purse seine and longline limits, and that the paper was an essential information source for this. The United 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
50  
  
States observed that FFA members had stated the current objectives for tropical tunas should be maintained, 
and stated it would agree to keep the objectives through 2020, but not necessarily after that, as they could 
be outdated by then. The United States asked FFA members to clarify what they would like to see happen 
with respect to the objectives in the tropical tuna measure.  
267. 
The EU noted that the Commission had entered uncharted waters with the multispecies harvest 
strategy approach, noting it had already shared its views on the complexity of the one species approach. It 
observed that the risk-based approach is based on an extremely conservative LRP adopted by the 
Commission, and stated that it was clear that focussing on a TRP based only on the spawning stock biomass 
could lead to endless discussion every time a stock assessment is updated. The EU stressed the need to 
consider this for the future. 
268. 
Tokelau, on behalf of PNA members, stated that discussions about how the TRP for one stock would 
affect the achievement of TRPs of other stocks was the wrong way to look at the issue. Given the current 
structure of the longline and purse seine fisheries, constraining purse seine effort and skipjack catches as a 
response to a harvest strategy for bigeye would involve the transfer of a very large burden of conservation 
action onto the SIDS in whose waters purse seining occurs. But practically that cannot occur because of the 
obligation on the Commission in Article 30 to avoid the transfer of a disproportionate burden onto SIDS. 
This obligation is repeated specifically in relation to harvest strategies in paragraph 12 of CMM 2014-06 on 
harvest strategies. PNA members stated that in practice this would mean that the achievement of the bigeye 
TRP would be related to the level of FAD effort and not the level of purse seine effort. 
269. 
Indonesia inquired regarding the multispecies considerations for the TRP for bigeye and yellowfin, 
and whether these would also be considered for skipjack, and whether SPC had prepared a paper to more 
generally inform how the TRP is adopted for these species. The presenter stated that SPC had received no 
requests to extend this to approach to the skipjack TRP, and stated there was no plan to produce any further 
documents related to the skipjack TRP.  
270. 
China observed that at WCPFC15, it agreed with the proposal for the South Pacific Albacore TRP, 
but received criticism internally because the proposal did not go through the SC. 
271. 
Palau stated that its position was to maintain the current management objectives for the two stocks, 
and then revisit the issue at WCPFC17. 
272. 
The Ocean Foundation (TOF), on behalf of TOF, Pew, and WWF, reiterated the importance of the 
harvest strategy process, which responds directly to the objectives in the WCPF Convention that all members 
share with respect to achieving sustainable fisheries. They stated that it was encouraging that CCMs 
generally agreed on the importance of the harvest strategy process in the WCPO, and that for bigeye and 
yellowfin, CCMs had the opportunity to make progress by adopting TRPs for those stocks. They stated their 
understanding that these decisions required careful consideration, but that the Commission could agree on 
interim points that could be used for future analysis. They also noted that despite significant previous 
investment in education and capacity building around harvest strategies development, over the course of 
several years, the discussion at WCPFC16 underscored the need to create a body such as the scientist–
manager dialogue working group. This would help progress the process of developing harvest strategies and 
improve understanding by answering some questions via dialogue among managers, scientists and other 
stakeholders. It would also be another opportunity for members to take greater control of the process. If 
needed, the dialogue group could be configured to focus its first meeting or meetings on capacity building 
or informal discussions, to enable a greater understanding and comfort with the harvest strategy 
approach. They also emphasised that the Commission had a responsibility to ensure stocks are sustainably 
managed for the long term, and that each year of inaction risks their long-term sustainability. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
51  
  
273. 
The Commission requested the Scientific Committee to provide advice on the formulation of 
TRPs for bigeye and yellowfin tuna for other candidate TRP indicators other than depletion ratio, such as 
longline CPUE.  
274. 
The Commission further requested the Scientific Service Provider to conduct an analysis for 
bigeye and yellowfin tuna similar to that undertaken in WCPFC16-2019-14 for skipjack. It further tasked 
SC16 in 2020 to review the bigeye and yellowfin assessments, advise on the uncertainty grid and provide 
advice on the range of depletion for analysis. With regard to the range of depletion, the Commission 
tasked the Scientific Service Provider to conduct the analysis and present their outcomes in 2020 to the 
TCC16 and WCPFC17.  
275. 
The Commission considered the development of target reference points for bigeye and yellowfin 
and agreed that in the interim paragraphs 12 and 14 of CMM 2018-01 be retained. It further tasked the 
Scientific Committee and the Scientific Service Provider to continue to explore potential candidate target 
reference points for the two stocks.  
 
7.2.1.3 Harvest control rules and management strategy evaluation for skipjack 
276. 
Dr Rob Scott (SPC-OFP) with reference to WCPFC16-2019-16 Results of Initial Evaluations of 
Management Procedures for Skipjack, provided a brief presentation on the current status of the Management 
Strategy Evaluation (MSE) framework for skipjack tuna and the design of the harvest control rules (HCRs) 
that are currently under investigation. It was noted that model-based management procedures (MPs) were 
currently being investigated but that the option to investigate empirical MPs had not been ruled out. The 
HCRs currently under investigation for skipjack are based on the level and distribution of fishing in 2012 
and apply to all fisheries with the exception of the archipelagic waters of the Solomon Islands and PNG, for 
which status quo (2012) conditions are assumed. Members were invited to propose alternative HCRs that 
could also be evaluated within the framework. 
277. 
Tuvalu, on behalf of FFA members emphasised the importance of including a PI for skipjack 
addressing disproportionate burden, and noted this was equally if not more important in multi-species 
analyses. It inquired whether SPC could reinstate this indicator for future analyses? 
278. 
Japan suggested that in practice employing an HCR would entail some level of fluctuations (e.g., 
10%) around a TRP; at present the limit for such fluctuations is set at a stock status of 0.4 SB/SBF=0, beyond 
which the Commission must take measures to regulate the stock. Japan made following points (i) inquired 
how that breaking point was decided, whether one criterion was the expected natural variation in the stock 
over the time, and whether other factors were involved; (ii) remarked on the importance of calculating 
various PIs (including the indicator on disproportionate burden mentioned by FFA members), and inquired 
if SPC could make another effort to calculate the PIs considered important by CCMs; (iii) noted, regarding 
a mixed fishery and MSE approach, that while SPC could conduct a MSE focussing only on skipjack, before 
applying management procedures it was important to examine the effect of skipjack management procedures 
on other species, to ensure they did not have a negative effect, and to at least be aware of and consider trade-
offs; (iv) stated that if skipjack was the priority species, then procedures could maximize benefits with regard 
to skipjack, but that the Commission needed to be aware and clearly understand the trade-offs that could 
result; and (v) reiterated that it supported the process but wanted to look at all species before applying this 
approach to skipjack.  
279. 
In response, the presenter stated that the value of 0.4 was fairly arbitrary, and a different assumption 
could be used. He noted that variability does enter through recruitment, and that under the HCR being 
discussed, effort was maintained at the 2012 level even if the stock was below the TRP. He noted that 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
52  
  
achievement of the TRP was just one PI — others are stability in catch, yield and effort. This TRP would 
be better at maintaining stability in effort, and possibly in catches, with a small leeway around the target; it 
would then be compared with other TRPs. Regarding calculation of PIs, problems arise because of the 
degree to which fisheries are aggregated in the evaluation framework. The work presented is based on the 
current stock assessment, and the level of aggregation in the stock assessment thus determines what SPC 
can do with the TRP. Proxies are used, and the level of depletion of the stock may be a good proxy —if the 
stock level is maintained, it may indicate that small-scale fishers are not overly impacted. Regarding the 
mixed fishery component and the impact on other species, SPC has not looked at this to date, but will do so.  
280. 
PNG supported the comments made by Japan regarding PIMPLE. It suggested the HCR design was 
possibly overly stark or drastic in terms of changes that are made once a point of inflection is reached and 
suggested more staggered points of inflection (and thus more gradual changes to the fishery) would be better. 
PNG agreed regarding the need to look at trade-offs in the future, and inquired what ratios would be used 
(50%, or 42%, which is FFA’s preference). PNG noted that PNA members wanted to ensure that a failure 
to agree on a revised TRP did not bring the work on a skipjack management procedure to a halt. For PNA 
members, proceeding with MSE work on the basis of the previous interim TRP (based on a different 
characterisation of the skipjack stock than the model that will be used for the MSE) did not make sense, and 
suggested this would probably require identifying more than one candidate revised TRP to be used in further 
analyses. PNA members proposed that the MSE work should continue using a 42% depletion ratio, at least 
as one of the options for the TRP. 
281. 
The EU stated it understood this was a work in progress, and that it was a priority. Given the 
Commission’s limited resources, the EU suggested progressing this as a case study, and using the experience 
to better consider other species in the future, while improving the current process, especially by increasing 
the participation by CCMs. The EU proposed developing a process through which CCMs could be more 
involved in key issues (e.g., conditioning of the model, determination of key assumptions, and the design of 
the HCR). It suggested doing this either by extending the SPC’s pre-assessment workshop to allow for more 
time and discussion on the MSC work, or by creating an electronic working group coordinated by SPC or a 
member, which would allow participation by CCM scientists in the MSC work. The EU stated it would be 
happy to consider other options but that a way to involve all members was needed.  
282. 
Indonesia stated that the paper (Section 3.1) made the assumption that all fisheries are subject to 
HCRs, except fisheries in archipelagic waters in region 5, and stated their understanding that this included 
Indonesian waters. Indonesia noted there had been some efforts to develop harvest strategies for tropical 
tuna in Indonesia’s archipelagic waters (discussed in WCPFC16-2019-DP20), and that further collaboration 
and consultation with SPC to develop a harvest strategy in their archipelagic waters was anticipated. 
Indonesia also asked for clarification on the reference to scalers in Section 3.1 of the paper. SPC affirmed 
that what was Area 4 in the 2016 stock assessment model was subject to the HCR, and that SPC was aware 
of the effort to develop harvest strategies for Indonesian waters, and that any future changes arising from 
this could be addressed, but for now SPC assumed that all fisheries in Region 4 of the 2016 stock assessment 
were subject to the HCR. Regarding scalars, it noted that large purse seine fisheries are scaled through effort, 
while others are scaled through catch, which corresponds to how the fisheries tend to be managed.  
283. 
Samoa inquired regarding the use of a proxy for small-scale fisheries and wondered how that 
accounted for disparity in small scale fisheries between CCMs, which could significantly impact on the 
development of such fisheries in SIDS. SPC stated that currently the HCR applies across the entire stock 
and tries to maintain the stock against that in region. The assumption is that if the stock is maintained around 
the TRP then fishery conditions should be stable around 2012 level in the region. But this is indeed a proxy, 
and more information may be revealed through monitoring of the PIs. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
53  
  
284. 
United States thanked the EU for their suggestion, which it said it would consider. It noted the 
importance of PIs, stating it understood the desire for specific PIs, with the understanding that some are 
difficult to measure. The United States noted CCMs should be aware of what PIs have been tentatively 
adopted. In  addition to the six in the paper, others are referred to in the paper as “indicators that have been 
requested by CCMs”, but in fact they have been adopted on an interim basis by the Commission. The United 
States suggested that those decisions, which might be in previous meeting reports, be compiled, made readily 
available, and referred to and used where appropriate. The United States suggested the need for a standalone 
document that includes all indicators adopted to date, which is then made readily available on the harvest 
strategy webpage. 
285. 
PNG, with regard to the EU’s suggestion, stated that while it may be technically more efficient to 
work on HCRs electronically, doing will not allow effective participation by all CCM. PNG referred to the 
amount of work that must happen before a more detailed discussion can be held among all CCMs.  
286. 
The Chair noted the importance of ensuring effective participation by all CCMs and stated that the 
issue would be taken up later during WCPFC16. 
287. 
SPC noted the question from Japan and stated that variability is addressed in PI 8, and this enables 
examination of how the HCR performs around the TRP. Regarding disproportionate burden, he stated that 
the current assumption is that any burden is spread evenly; the HCR does not examine allocation. However, 
this can be looked at in detail in the multispecies fisheries HCR. Regarding small-scale fisheries, the 
fisheries currently considered under the HCR are those included in the current stock assessment model. To 
incorporate small scale fisheries requires good data. If there is a strong desire to include these fisheries, and 
data is available to allow this, SPC can look at doing this.  
7.2.2 
Review of CMM 2018–01 (bigeye, yellowfin and skipjack) 
288. 
Dr Graham Pilling (SPC-OFP) presented WCPFC16-2019-17 Evaluation of CMM 2018-01 for 
tropical tuna, with the following documents prepared for reference: WCPFC16-2019-13 Reference 
document for the review of CMM 2018-01 and development of harvest strategies under CMM 2014-06 
(bigeye, yellowfin and skipjack tuna), WCPFC16-2019-IP04 Summary of the Reports received under 
Tropical Tuna CMMs - from 2017 to 2018, and WCPFC16-2019-IP05_rev1, Catch and effort tables on 
tropical tuna CMMs. WCPFC16-2019-17 evaluates the potential for CMM 2018-01 to achieve its 
objectives for each of the three WCPO tropical tuna stocks as specified in paragraphs 12 to 14. The 
evaluation was based upon the latest SC-agreed stock assessments. The paper evaluates the adjustments 
from CMM 2017-01 to CMM 2018-01, and finds that, overall, the changes do not materially affect the 
management conditions assumed under the evaluation. However, while paragraph 18 (FAD definition 
excluding “small amounts of garbage”) was found to have negligible impact on the evaluation, any increase 
in the number of “FAD sets” due to this paragraph will “result in increased catches of bigeye and small 
yellowfin tuna”. As in previous evaluations, it is difficult to identify exact future fishing conditions resulting 
from the CMM. Therefore, two future scenarios were evaluated, representing “optimistic” and “pessimistic” 
future fishing levels under the CMM. Overall, the ability of the CMM to achieve its objectives for bigeye 
tuna was dependent upon the assumption made for future recruitment to the stock. Under the more positive 
“recent recruitment” assumption, all scenarios for future fishing under the CMM achieved CMM objectives, 
while all failed to do so under the less positive “long term” assumption. For yellowfin tuna, the “optimistic” 
scenario approximately achieves CMM objectives, but the “pessimistic” scenario does not. For skipjack 
tuna, based upon the 2019 stock assessment, the CMM does not achieve the corresponding objective, as the 
stock settles below the interim TRP of 50% SBF=0. The paper also evaluates additional requests made by 
CCMs at SC15. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
54  
  
289. 
Korea noted that that in regard to high seas fishing effort Korea was working to reconcile differences 
between its own data and that of SPC and identify the origins of the differences. It stated that it would keep 
CCMs informed. 
290. 
Tokelau, on behalf of FFA members stated their concern that SPC did not taken into account the 
requests made at TCC to evaluate the impact of all "special provisions" on the performance of CMM 2018-
01, and that the evaluation still concentrates mainly on the SIDS special provisions. They stated that they 
understood SPC had not had time to complete the work but stated that the only equitable solution was for 
the review to be postponed to 2020. It suggested this involved politicisation of the SC, when some CCMs 
can ask for an analysis of the impact of certain exemptions and not others, and with no scientific rationale 
for making these distinctions. FFA members stated they had no interest in having the Commission’s science 
processes used for “national point scoring”, which they stated mars discussions in many RFMOs. They 
stated the special provisions for developing and small island states were not new, but were incorporated into 
the Convention for good reason and accepted by all signatories, including those invited to join the 
Commission following finalisation of the final text. They requested a review of the tropical tuna measure 
be postponed until all special provisions could be evaluated and considered by SC16, and stated that 
meanwhile the purpose of the measure is to provide a "robust transitional management regime that ensures 
the sustainability of bigeye, skipjack, and yellowfin tuna stocks" continues to be achieved. 
291. 
The EU stated that it was normal and legitimate to expect that the Commission evaluates and takes 
into account in its deliberations the impact of exemptions in the fishery, and seek to base decisions on the 
relevant data. It stated that deciding on allocations in the high seas, especially for states fishing there with 
no limits, was important as this would impact stock status and could compromise the work and conservation 
efforts of the Commission. The EU also referenced the need to regulate FADs, and to harmonize FAD rules 
in the high seas and EEZs, because of increased FAD sets in EEZs.  
292. 
Japan referenced effort creep, which it stated has clearly been seen in purse seine fisheries as a result 
of increased use of echo sounders and new technology, noting that almost all FADs were now equipped with 
echo sounders, which has not been taken into account. Japan noted the gap between the pessimistic and 
optimistic scenarios was narrow and requested SPC to take effort creep into account during the subsequent 
evaluation of the CMM.  
293. 
Kiribati supported the statement by Tokelau and stressed that these were important issues for SIDS 
and were really the basis of having Article 30 in the Convention text.  
294. 
Palau, on behalf of other PNA members, supported the FFA statement, and stated they were not in 
a position to consider the report, because, in their view, it was incomplete because (i) no scientific rationale 
was provided by SC for the choice of the specific provisions for which separate analyses were requested; 
and (ii) it does not deal in a comprehensive and balanced way with the various specific provisions in the 
CMM. Consequently, PNA members supported the FFA proposal that the report be referred back to the SC 
for further consideration. 
295. 
SPC stated it was trying to get better analyse patterns of effort creep in the fishery, with a number 
of ongoing studies looking at FAD acoustic data, and thanked it partners in those efforts. It stated that 
although it was doing it best to examine the issue, it might not be able to incorporate this into the evaluation 
prepared in 2020. 
296. 
The United States stated that while there were good reasons for including particular special 
provisions and exceptions, it was important for the Commission to understand the implications of these 
decisions. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
55  
  
297. 
The Commission acknowledged the need to negotiate a successor measure to replace CMM 2018-
01 which will expire at end of 2020.  
 
7.2.2.1 Purse seine limits for high seas  
298. 
Niue, on behalf of FFA members, referenced WCPFC2019-DP06 Views on High Seas limits and 
Allocation in the Tropical Tuna CMM, which presents the views of FFA members on high seas purse seine 
limits. FFA members stated that agreeing to a high seas limit and allocation for the tropical purse seine 
fishery was a priority as it was discussed in depth and agreed to in 2017, resulting in CMM 2018-01. FFA 
members stated that in their view a high seas allocation framework for purse seine fisheries would not 
include considerations of current limits that apply within the EEZs of FFA member countries. FFA members 
expected any high seas limits to be consistent with achieving the agreed TRPs and maintaining or reducing 
current catch and/or effort accordingly. They stated that the allocation framework should commence with 
setting an overall limit for the high seas, which is then divided to create a share of this limit that specifically 
recognises the special circumstances of SIDs as outlined in Article 30, and the rights of SIDs to develop 
fisheries in the high seas. To facilitate development of limits and an allocation framework, FFA members 
proposed that WCPFC hold a two-day workshop in conjunction with one of the meetings of its subsidiary 
bodies in 2020 with a view to the WCPFC reaching decisions at WCPFC 17. Sufficient budget should be 
allocated for the additional days to ensure SIDS are able to attend. In order to progress the workshop 
proposal, FFA members drew attention to the draft TORs for such a workshop developed by the WCPFC 
Chair (in her role as vice-Chair) during WCPFC15. 
299. 
FSM on behalf of PNA members referenced paragraph 28 of CMM 2018-01, where CCMs 
committed to agreeing on hard effort or catch limits for the high seas, noting that such an agreement would 
close one of the major gaps in the Commission arrangements for management of the tropical tuna fisheries. 
They suggested some CCMs sought to go back on what was clearly agreed in paragraph 28 and considered 
it would be a serious lost opportunity for strengthening the management of purse seine in the high seas if 
that occurred. 
300. 
Korea stated it sought additional fishing opportunities in the high seas, noting anecdotal evidence 
from its industry that indicated recent aggregations of tropical tuna appeared in the high seas more frequently 
compared to past years, and that the pattern is especially evident in El Nino seasons, and may reoccur any 
time in future. Under such a circumstance, Korea stated that if it had only allocations to fish in EEZs, and 
none for the high seas, it would be unable to fish, even if fish were present in the high seas. Korea stated its 
goal was not to change the existing system, but instead to explore the possibility of using vessel days 
purchased under bilateral fishing arrangements in the high seas, while making sure that such a system does 
not negatively affect the sovereign rights or aspirations of SIDS. If established, such a system would enable 
more flexible positions in future negotiations of high seas arrangements and allocations, and would give 
more flexibility to fishing operations. Korea stated that the Commission must ensure in any case that overall 
purse seine effort or catch limits are controlled within the upper limit that the Commission sets. Korea 
requested that FFA members carefully consider this idea and looked forward to in-depth technical 
discussions with FFA members and other interested CCMs. 
301. 
The United States reemphasised that examining limits for the high seas necessitated looking at 
exploitation of purse seine fisheries across the entire Convention Area. It stated that the overall limit is 
driven primarily by the TRP for skipjack; the Commission does not know if that TRP should be adjusted, 
so all aspects should be addressed together. It supported the FFA proposal to pursue that work. 
302. 
The EU agreed that allocation should be discussed prior to WCPFC17, but stated that this 
necessitated considering allocations in both the high seas and EEZs. The EU noted that these are highly 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
56  
  
migratory stocks; and allocation must take into account the dynamics of stocks and the fisheries on those 
stocks, in line with international law (UNCLOS and the UNFSA). The EU agreed that Article 30 must also 
be considered and suggested that all nations fishing in the high seas should be considered DWFNs, and be 
considered according to the same rules.  
303. 
Japan agreed on the need to discuss the issues in 2020, but expressed concern that it would be 
difficult to find time for separate meetings.   
304. 
American Samoa made a statement intended to explain the relationship between American Samoa 
and the United States as it relates to the workings of the WCPFC. It stated that American Samoa is a territory 
of the United States, similar to a number of members (e.g., French Polynesia, Wallis and Futuna, New 
Caledonia, and Tokelau). American Samoa relies on the United States to represent the interests of the 
Territory in many forums but in the specific case of tuna, feels it is very important to directly engage the 
Commission. Like all Pacific Islands, American Samoa depends on tuna to maintain the economic and social 
health of its people. It currently has one fully operational cannery that employs over 2000 workers and has 
worked hard over many years to develop a locally based United States-flagged fleet of purse seiners and 
longliners to supply that cannery. The EEZ of American Samoa is surrounded by the EEZs of other 
countries, territories and the high seas and its fleets are dependent on maintaining access to those areas. The 
high seas are especially important as it is one of the largest fishing areas that is within an economically 
viable area of operation for American Samoa’s locally based fleet and has historically been very important 
to support the local canneries. American Samoa stressed that it had its own very specific needs to have 
access to the high seas for its locally based fleet. 
305. 
Indonesia stated that according to CMM 2018-01, Indonesia has zero limit and that zero limit is in 
brackets, which means that Indonesia has the opportunity to utilize the high seas purse seine effort limit in 
the future. It also stated that in 2018-01 para 45 Indonesia is able to add flagged purse seine vessels larger 
than 24m with freezing capacity operating between 20°N and 20°S, by considering that Indonesia is a 
developing state that has the opportunity to develop its own domestic fishing fleet to fish in the Convention 
area. It also supported the FFA proposal to have a workshop to discuss high seas effort limit during 
WCPFC17.  
306. 
China thanked FFA for its proposal and agreed such a meeting was needed to establish a common 
understanding of what the catch limit is. It suggested fishing days could be used as now applied for DWFN, 
but stated that fishing effort must not be increased, and negative impact must be avoided.  
307. 
Kiribati stated it had already established a limit for its EEZ, and noted that as Palau and FSM stated, 
CCMs committed themselves in paragraph 28 of CMM 2018-01 to agreeing on hard effort or catch limits 
for the high seas. It stated that PNA members considered that it would be a serious lost opportunity for 
strengthening the management of purse seine in the high seas if CCMs go back on that agreement. 
308. 
RMI reiterated the FFA proposal, emphasising it only wanted to look at a framework for allocation, 
and was not ready to discuss allocation at present. It emphasised the need to think broadly, beyond any 
meetings or workshops, and to use an equitable principle.  
309. 
Tuvalu supported a workshop to address the issue, while noting that it is not in the same position as 
others in relation to fishing in the high seas, as the high seas are adjacent to Tuvalu’s EEZ. Tuvalu stressed 
that it was unfair for high seas allocation to be based on historical catch.  
310. 
PNG thanked China for their comments on the success of the management regime applied by SIDS, 
while stating that the high seas were different, and urged CCMs to come together regarding their 
expectations from the proposed workshop.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
57  
  
311. 
CCMs held an extended discussion regarding whether and when to hold a dedicated workshop, and 
the TORs for a workshop. Reference was made to the TORs drafted at WCPFC15 (included in an annex to 
WCPFC16-2019-DP06). Discussion was continued by a SWG to develop a terms of reference for a 
workshop on high seas purse seine effort limits and bigeye longline limit allocation, led by Papua New 
Guinea,, which was unable to reach consensus and recommended that the Commission hold an extended 
meeting in 2020. The issue was further discussed under Agenda Item 7.2.2.3 
312. 
The Commission agreed to consider the requirements of paragraph 28 of CMM 2018-01 at an 
extended WCPFC17 meeting which will be a seven (7) day regular annual session in 2020. 
 
7.2.2.2 Purse seine EEZ limits for concerned CCMs yet to notify their limits 
313. 
The Chair referenced WCPFC16-2019-IP04, Summary of the Reports received under Tropical 
Tuna CMMs from 2018 to 2019.  
314. 
The Philippines stated that it was required to submit the limits of its purse seine effort and/or catch 
of skipjack, yellowfin and bigeye within its EEZ in accordance with the effort limits established and notified 
to the Commission as required under paragraph 25 of CMM 2017-01. During TCC15, the submission was 
considered unclear because the effort limit was in number of fishing vessels instead of fishing vessel days. 
The Philippines received guidance on the issue at TCC15 from other CCMs and stated that it sincerely 
appreciated that assistance. The Philippines finalized, after consulting with its stakeholders, its purse seine 
limits in its EEZ. This is set at 42,000 fishing vessel days in lieu of the original submission, based on the 
current capacities and conditions of the small purse seine fishing vessels operating in the Philippines Pacific 
seaboard EEZ. These include wooden hulled ring net/purse seine fishing vessels.  The Philippines referred 
the meeting to WCPFC16-2019-DP25 for the latest notification.   
315. 
Indonesia stated that it is in the process of formulating the effort or catch limit of its purse seine 
fishery, with several areas still outstanding to calculate total purse seine effort in its EEZ and territorial 
waters, noting there is an overlap of effort for these areas. Two consultation workshops were held to 
determine the EEZ purse seine catch limit using the historical data of annual catch estimates and it was 
estimated at 68,935 tons, including skipjack 54,817 tons, yellowfin 13,850 tons and bigeye 633 tons (with 
a standard deviation of 20%). 
316. 
The Commission noted the notifications in reference to paragraph 25 of CMM 2018-01 on purse 
seine EEZ limits that were submitted by the Philippines, Korea and Chinese Taipei (in WCPFC16-2019-
IP04) and the subsequent update from Philippines (WCPFC16-2019-DP25).  
 
7.2.2.3 Longline limits for bigeye 
317. 
The Chair referenced two papers introduced under Agenda Item 4: WCPFC16-2019-DP06, Views 
on High Seas limits and Allocation in the Tropical Tuna CMM and WCPFC16-2019-DP10, Proposals on 
Conservation and Management Measures on Tropical Tunas. 
DP06 
 
318. 
Tonga, on behalf of FFA members, stated that work should begin on determining high seas longline 
bigeye allocations. FFA members thanked the United States for their proposal (WCPFC16-2019-DP10) on 
the matter and the process they suggested. FFA members sought to clarify that before agreeing to any 
process and in particular to the allocation process, they would not agree to a continuation of flag-based, 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
58  
  
convention-wide bigeye limits for longline, stating that agreement must be reached to pursue area-based 
limits that treat EEZs and high seas separately before embarking on any longline bigeye limit-setting and 
allocation process. FFA members proposed that para 44 be considered together with para 28 (discussed 
under Agenda Item 7.2.2.1) to be discussed in a workshop in 2020 on the margins of one of the meetings of 
the Commission’s subsidiary bodies. FFA members looked forward to working closely and constructively 
with all CCMs to agreeing on hard limits for the longline bigeye fishery in the high seas in the next 12 
months, stating that such limits would have to be compatible with limits put in place by FFA members to 
manage longline fishing within their EEZs. 
319. 
Japan stated that the situation surrounding the longline fishery was different from the purse seine 
fishery. Most of Japan’s purse seine fishing is in EEZs, but it undertakes substantial longline fishing on the 
high seas. Japan stated it was difficult to agree to such a drastic change from flag-based to zone-based 
allocation for longline catch. Japan agreed limits would have to be determined in 2020 and looked forward 
to an exchange of views. 
320. 
China stated that flag-based catch limit on the high seas was a long-standing practice, both in the 
WCPO and other areas. China stated it was happy to discuss the issue. It stated its understanding that 
allocations could only be to members and stated the need for fairness. New Caledonia asked for clarification 
regarding China’s intervention. China stated that if tropical tuna was allocated to French Polynesia, New 
Caledonia, or Wallis and Futuna, it should be under France. French Polynesia stated that they preferred to 
keep each territories allocation separate, noting that the Commission should consider the needs of each SIDS 
and developing territory, as their needs and aspirations are completely different, and stated that France 
supported this view. New Caledonia supported the statement by French Polynesia, noting they have specific 
economic conditions, and wanted to preserve their right to fish in their EEZ. New Zealand stated that in 
relation to the points raised by China, under Article 43 of the Convention New Zealand had granted Tokelau 
full participatory rights in the work of the Commission and that further detail on the role of participating 
territories was provided in Annex II to the Rules of Procedure.  
321. 
Korea referenced DP06, and its statement that “work should also begin on determination of high 
seas longline bigeye allocations. This will require changes to the current flag based big eye catch limits 
which should be re-engineered so as not to apply to catches taken inside EEZs.” Korea inquired whether 
this was intended to mean that (i) historical catch taken in EEZs should be attributed to coastal states? If so, 
Korea stated it could not agree, as it would entail drastic changes in catch limits for CCMs; or (ii) does it 
mean in future catch taken in EEZs will be attributed to coastal states? If the latter, Korea stated that was 
subject to negotiations between costal states and fishing nations.  
322. 
Chinese Taipei stated that its longstanding position on longline fishery management was clear, and 
that it could not accept a change from flag to zone-based management. However, it welcomed the chance to 
discuss the issue in 2020 and onwards. 
323. 
Indonesia stated it favoured the current arrangement with regard to the bigeye longline catch limit. 
Allocations would apply only to the high seas and not apply to catches in EEZs and territorial waters. 
324. 
The EU agreed with the plan of work proposed by the USA. It did not see the need for drastic 
changes in the allocations for bigeye longline fisheries, noting that even if changes were made it was not 
clear how this would impact the current fishery. The EU argued for the need to avoid drastic change to the 
rights of those involved.  
325. 
FSM on behalf of PNA members supported the FFA proposal to replace the current bigeye catch 
limits with a more effective set of limits for fishing for bigeye. It stated that the current limits are of little 
value, being partial, with no effective monitoring; because they are based on historical catch levels, the 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
59  
  
current flag-based limits inevitably come with a SIDS exemption, and any other arrangement would mean 
that the Commission is effectively determining who could fish in EEZs, and obstructing SIDS from 
developing the capacity to harvest their fair share of the resources, even in their own waters. FSM stated 
that the only fair and effective way forward was to move to zone-based limits, with limits for each EEZ, and 
a separate scheme of limits for the high seas. For PNA members, EEZ limits would be based on the longline 
VDS; the limits should be associated with a comprehensive scheme, to ensure robust monitoring and 
independent verification. 
DP10 
 
326. 
The United States referenced WCPFC16-2019-DP10, noting that other than adding limits for some 
CCMs, it was not proposing significant changes to the scheme for the longline industry. It stated that the 
intent was to establish catch limits for all CCMs. This would be done by first determining a bigeye longline 
total allowable catch (TAC), which would be based on (i) determination of a target or allowable exploitation 
for bigeye by all sectors, tied to a TRP, or informed by the risk of breaching the LRP; (ii) determining the 
proportion of this target to be allocated to the longline sector, using fishery impact on SSB as the unit of 
measurement; and (iii) converting the longline allocation into a TAC. It would then be necessary to specify 
how shares of the longline TAC are allocated among CCMs and provide a scheme for transfer of TAC shares 
among CCMs.  
327. 
Japan stated that the proposal by the United States was an option that should be considered. It noted 
its support for a continued flag-based approach, and also referenced the option it provides for sharing 
between gears. Japan inquired how to proceed with this idea, and if the Commission could receive scientific 
input on how this might work, noting the need to discuss how to manage bigeye longline catch in 2020. 
328. 
The Chair addressed the need for CCMs to determine the data needs for the proposed workshop, 
noting the suggestion to estimate how to share TAC between different gear types.  
329. 
Korea stated its position that the proposal appeared reasonable, but expressed the concern that in 
case of purse seine fisheries, it is very hard to estimate bigeye catch in a timely manner, with the result that 
RFMOs control bigeye catch through effort rather than catch limits. It suggested that any new system should 
not bring too drastic a change to the existing system. 
330. 
RMI asked for clarification that the proposal applied to the high seas, and inquired how the United 
States proposed to consider the FFA proposal in the context of its proposal. 
331. 
United States stated that it was proposing a new idea with respect to allocating bigeye exploitation 
among the fishing sectors, but one that was very similar to what the Commission has done in the past, which 
led to the combination of longline catch limits and FAD closures. In that case SPC provided tables with 
various combinations of FAD limits/closure lengths and longline bigeye limits; the result was specific catch 
limits for the longline fishery, and specific FAD limits/closure lengths for the purse seine fishery. In DP10 
the United States stated it was suggesting using a common unit of measurement for all the sectors (fishery 
impact on SSB) for the purpose of achieving a fair allocation of exploitation among the sectors, and then 
converting those sector-specific allocations to appropriate units for each sector – for example, catch limits 
in the longline sector and FAD limits in the purse seine sector. Regarding the question posed by RMI, the 
United States stated that the task in paragraph 44 of the tropical tuna measures is not a high seas-specific 
task; its understanding is that the task is to establish limits across the Convention Area. The United States 
stated that to accommodate the FFA proposal as part of the USA proposal would be difficult, as it was 
proposing something very different. The United States welcomed further discussion, but stated these were 
very different ideas.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
60  
  
332. 
Kiribati stated that in the discussion of bigeye limits, it was not in a position to agree to any proposal 
that would undermine its sovereign rights and would focus only on the high seas discussion.  
333. 
The Chair stated that it was necessary to move forward in 2020 on addressing longline limits and 
purse seine limits as currently set in paragraphs 28 and 44 of 2018-01. CCMs discussed various options, 
including establishing a virtual workshop, having a dedicated face to face meeting, and holding an extended 
session of the Commission meeting; varying opinions regarding provision of data were also expressed. 
Agreement was reached that the Commission would discuss revisions to 2018-01 during an extended (7-
day) WCPFC17 meeting. She encouraged CCMs to be mindful regarding the existing understanding that 
establishes a 30-day deadline prior to the meeting for submission of proposals.  
334. 
The Commission agreed to consider the requirements of paragraph 44 of CMM 2018-01 at an 
extended WCPFC17 meeting which will be a seven (7) day regular annual session in 2020. 
 
7.2.2.4 FAD Management 
335. 
The Chair referenced three papers introduced under Agenda Item 4: WCPFC16-2019-DP09, Joint 
T-RFMO FAD Working Group Recommendations for consideration by WCPFC16, WCPFC16-2019-DP10 
Proposals on Conservation and Management Measures on Tropical Tunas; and WCPFC16-2019-DP16 
Proposed changes to the Rules for the FAD Closure. 
DP09 
 
336. 
The EU introduced DP09, stating that it was proposing that the WCPFC FAD Management Options 
IWG consider the recommendations from the Joint t-RFMO FAD WG, evaluate their merits for the WCPFC, 
and continue to work with the Joint t-RFMO FAD WG.  
337. 
French Polynesia supported the continued collaboration with other RFMOs, and consideration of 
the recommendations by the IWG on FAD management options. It noted that it is located within the 
Convention Overlap Area, and promoted greater consistency across the Pacific, especially in relation to 
FADs. French Polynesia stated its perspective that strong collaboration across RFMOs is a good way to 
address concerns such as limitation of the number of FADs, FAD definition, FAD identification registration 
and tracking, lost FADs, and beaching events. 
338. 
Vanuatu, on behalf of FFA members, noted the number of technical recommendations and 
suggested it was most appropriate that these be referred to the FAD Management Options IWG to assess 
what is of value to their current work, and if needed, further guidance from the Commission. While FFA 
members supported cooperation with other t-RFMOs, in particular those with work relevant to WCPFC, it 
stated FFA members are very cautious of internationally driven initiatives that often pose more harm than 
good to the work of WCPFC, in particular to CCM’s rights as coastal states in the management of these 
fisheries. FFA members stated they would be very clear in the FAD Management Options IWG when 
deliberating these recommendations, to ensure the work of the FAD Management Options IWG and FAD 
management are not distracted by these initiatives. 
339. 
Kiribati, on behalf of PNA members supported the statement by FFA members, stating they were 
concerned that many of the recommendations reflect conditions in regions with lower standards of FAD 
management than the WCPO. Kiribati stated that high levels of FAD fishing are causing the destruction of 
bigeye and yellowfin stocks in every ocean outside the WCPO. In the Indian Ocean, according to a recent 
Pew study, around 80% of the catch in the purse seine fishery is taken from FADs, and yellowfin is 
overfished and overfishing of bigeye is occurring. In the Atlantic Ocean, around 75% of the purse seine 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
61  
  
catch is taken from FADs, with the result that the bigeye and yellowfin stocks are overfished. The EPO is a 
little different because of the amount of setting on dolphin-associated schools, but FAD use is high and 
increasing, and there is overfishing of bigeye and yellowfin. In the WCPO, by comparison, about half of the 
purse seine catch comes from free schools, resulting in less pressure on juvenile bigeye and yellowfin and 
other bycatch species. PNA members noted that it wasn’t always that way. When the Commission first met 
in 2004, 76% of the purse seine catch came from FAD sets and, if it hadn’t been for the FAD closure, the 
MSC free school certification, and tighter controls on FADs generally, the WCPO bigeye and yellowfin 
stocks would likely be in the same condition as those elsewhere. PNA members acknowledged that WCPO 
FAD management arrangements are not completely effective, and need to be strengthened.  PNA members 
looked forward to working with other CCMs at the FAD Management Options IWG to consider relevant 
recommendations from the Joint t-RFMO FAD WG, but don’t see it as a major priority for the meeting.  
340. 
The United States agreed that in many respects the WCPFC is ahead of others in the management 
of FADs, but observed this did not mean work done elsewhere should be ignored, and supported the 
recommendations made by the EU.  
341. 
France supported the regulation of FADs.  
342. 
New Caledonia stated that its EEZ is entirely a national park. It said that FADs should be better 
managed to reduce the impact on the environment and supported the proposal.  
343. 
The EU thanked CCMs for their support, and agreed with some of the comments, including the 
observation that the WCPFC is ahead of other RFMOs regarding FAD management. It noted several 
research activities that should be considered. It also observed that there was no meeting schedule for the 
IWG, and suggested that the IWG could meet and discuss these issues at TCC or another meeting.  
344. 
Nauru supported the comment by Kiribati and noted that PNA members valued the opportunity to 
work in the FAD working group. It supported consideration of relevant recommendations of the Joint t-
RFMO FAD WG through the FAD IWG.  
DP10 (FADs) and DP16 
 
345. 
Korea stated that there had been some progress in relation to the FAD management proposals in 
DP10 (USA) and DP 16 (Korea) following discussions between the United States and Korea in the margins 
of WCPFC16 and introduced the text of the merged proposal. The United States confirmed that it was 
withdrawing its proposal and welcomed discussion on the combined proposal. 
346. 
Tuvalu, on behalf of PNA members, stated they did not agree the WCPFC should amend its FAD 
definition to align with that of the IATTC and other RFMOs as suggested by Korea. They noted the 
following: 
i. 
FADs are managed very differently in the WCPFC compared to other RFMOs. The IATTC and the 
other RFMOs have not yet adopted a FAD closure, although it is clearly global best practice for FAD 
management, meaning the definition and distinction of set types is an academic and scientific issue 
in those regions. 
ii. In the WCPO, the FAD definition is a compliance issue because it is an important component of the 
FAD closure. Therefore, the WCPFC must have a specific, tightly defined and unambiguous 
definition of a FAD and cannot use the inadequate definitions adopted by other RFMOs.  
iii. There is a much greater level of fishing on logs in the WCPO than in the EPO. In the understanding 
of PNA members, the definition of some other RFMOs would allow fishing on logs during the FAD 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
62  
  
closure with a significant increase in catch of juvenile bigeye and yellowfin. In addition, evidence 
suggests that the definitions used by other RFMOs do not contribute to better FAD management. 
iv. Importantly, most FAD fishing in the WCPO occurs in national waters under national laws, and PNA 
national laws do not provide scope for the proposals by Korea and the US, which would require 
changes to regulations and licence conditions in several PNA members. Thus, PNA members will 
require much better evidence of the need for such changes than provided to date. 
 
347. 
Kiribati on behalf of FFA members stated they were open to constructive proposals to improve the 
effectiveness and flexibility of FAD management, noting that the FAD definition was in their national laws. 
In that respect, they appreciated the United States approach of suggesting a possible extension to the FAD 
closure, in association with a revised FAD definition. They noted it did not appeal to FFA members because 
of the adverse economic effects of the FAD closure, but stated they were prepared to develop, with the 
United States, a description of the work that could be undertaken by SPC for discussion of this issue at the 
FAD Management Options IWG in 2020. The IWG could examine scientific information available on 
alternative FAD definitions and associated measures such as the extended FAD closure and a pre-dawn set 
ban, subject to the fact that the definition of a FAD is embedded in CCMs’ national laws. FFA members 
noted that how a FAD is defined will affect fishing practices and ultimately catch or effort limits. They 
looked forward to a holistic approach to discussing the different parts of CMM 2018-01 measure and the 
best way to progress in 2020. 
348. 
Japan thanked the United States and Korea for their combined proposal and raised two concerns: 
practical differences in terms of compliance and judgement, and possible impacts by changing the definition 
of FADs. It noted past problems with FADs caused by some extent by the FAD definition and suggested 
changing the definition could help inspectors and fishing masters avoid any unnecessary compliance issues. 
Japan also observed a change in definition could also have a potential negative impact on fish stocks, and 
therefore supported the suggested changes in paragraph C of the combined proposal. Japan noted it might 
not be possible to reach consensus at WCPFC16, but supported the direction proposed. It suggested that 
SPC could examine the impacts of the proposal, and noted that it understood the issues raised by the PNA 
and FFA members, while stressing that narrowing the definition could avoid unnecessary problems. 
349. 
The EU agreed on the need for a clearer definition on FADs to reduce confusion regarding 
compliance. It agreed the proposal could contribute to globally increase catches.  However, it is not clear 
what is the magnitude of this increase and therefore the EU would need some input from SPC to better judge 
if it is accurate to support the proposal. 
350. 
SPC stated that the evaluation performed was specific to the particular factors and indicators that 
observers noted in their logbooks (it looked at man-made objects). SPC observed that any increase in sets 
would increase the catch, and that the proposal mentioned sets on floating objects without FAD buoys, 
which would serve to increase the number of sets, and could also lead to a perverse incentive to place 
tracking buoys on floating objects after setting on those.  
351. 
Chinese Taipei agreed that it was very difficult to determine whether a vessel was setting on a FAD 
because of the ambiguous definition of FADs and encouraged the Commission to consider the practical 
application of the definition.  
352. 
RMI reaffirmed the position taken by FFA and PNA members regarding national laws and 
regulations regarding the definition of a FAD. RMI suggested that the proposal might only apply in the high 
seas in view of Para. 32 of the CMM. It also noted that a CMM 2013-06 assessment would have been 
helpful.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
63  
  
353. 
The United States noted that it had just come from a compliance meeting and stated that for a 
monitoring and compliance scheme to work it must be achievable and realistic. It noted that it is impossible 
to see a piece of floating trash from a distance of 1 mile and stated that the issue involved the basic credibility 
of the Commission.  
354. 
China thanked Korea and the USA, and stated it had no problems in principle. It raised the issue 
discussed by Tuvalu, regarding the change in domestic law, and asked whether domestic laws would be 
affected if the measure applied only to the high seas. 
355. 
Indonesia thanked Korea and the United States for their proposal, and stated they understood the 
reasons for regulating FADs, and how powerful FAD fishing is, especially when combined with the use of 
lights, and suggested these techniques should possibly be considered in combination. Regarding the 
operation of FADs, Indonesia noted that drifting FADs with tracking buoys are addressed, but anchored 
FADs may not need tracking buoys. Indonesia suggested any FAD closure exclusion should not include 
objects intentionally designed to attract fish. 
356. 
Cook Islands stated, on behalf of FFA members, that they could not agree to the proposal to roll 
over paragraph 18, but stated their willingness to work with Korea, in 2020, on improving FAD management 
in a way that strengthens and does not undermine the effectiveness of the FAD closure. The United States 
also stated it was ready to work with other CCMs to find appropriate language to modify the measure.  
357. 
Korea stated, regarding comments by FFA and PNA members, that the reference to IATTC’s 
definition was by way of example, and not to advocate for adopting the same definition, given the differences 
in the circumstances and characteristics of the fishery in the WCPO and EPO. Korea emphasised it was not 
trying to change the definition of FADs, but to change the rules for FAD closures, through an interim 
measure to address issues that had been experienced. Regarding the comments that changes would be 
required to national laws, Korea suggested it might be possible to mitigate or address those concerns by 
adjusting the list of floating objects in the proposal. Korea stated that it was concerned with the impacts of 
any changes on bigeye and yellowfin juvenile tuna and noted that in order for SPC to conduct more precise 
analyses, more precise text was needed in the CMM. Korea stated its preference to apply the CMM 
throughout the Convention Area, but if that was not possible, to apply it at least in the high seas. Finally, it 
stated the need to further consider the issue of anchored FADs.  
358. 
Following further revisions of its proposal, Korea requested further input from CCMs regarding 
their concerns. 
359. 
Tuvalu, on behalf of PNA members, stated they had given serious consideration to the latest 
revisions to the joint FAD proposal put forward by Korea and the United States. They reaffirmed that 
revising the definition was a serious issue for PNA members because the definition of a FAD is in their 
national laws and is not easily changed, and is also an important factor in the work of observers, and there 
would have to be a strong rationale to move in that direction. Tuvalu stated that moving towards practices 
adopted by other RFMOs with a record of complete failure in control of FADs and management of bigeye 
and yellowfin was not a strong basis for convincing lawmakers of the need for change. Tuvalu stated PNA 
members had considered agreeing to the application of some elements of the joint proposal in the high seas 
through amendment of CMM 2009-02, but noted that would explicitly contradict the important principle of 
compatibility, and had concluded that was not a good way to strengthen FAD management. For these and 
other previously explained reasons, PNA members stated they were unable to agree to the joint proposal to 
revise the FAD definition.  
360. 
The United States stated that there was clearly a lack of consensus to address the issue as set forth 
in paragraph C in the Korea–United States proposal. The United States stated its understanding of the need 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
64  
  
for compatibility, and for further work on the issue of FAD management, including regarding managing 
untracked floating objects. The United States stated it wished to continue to explore how best to manage 
FADs, and in order to better understand how to address untracked objects the Commission would benefit 
from additional data, as called for under paragraph C of the proposal. 
361. 
Korea agreed with USA’s comment regarding information and para C. Regarding Tuvalu’s 
comments, Korea reiterated that the proposal was not an attempt to change the definition of a FAD, but to 
change the rule for FAD closures only. Regarding the national laws of coastal states, it stated that 
amendments might be needed, and acknowledged how difficult that could be, but noted that the CMM stated 
that CCMs would determine how this should be applied in their waters. 
362. 
Kiribati supported the statement by Tuvalu on behalf of PNA. Regarding para. C, Kiribati stated it 
had problems with the language as proposed but would work with the United States on language for FAD 
management that could be used in 2020.  
363. 
Japan thanked Korea and USA, reiterated its disappointment and concern regarding returning to the 
previously used approach and stated it would continue to work to find a better definition for FADs in 2020 
in the context of the tropical tuna negotiations. It agreed with the perspective of the United States and Korea 
regarding para C and stated that unless the Commission had an improved assessment of possible impacts of 
changing the FAD definition, it would be very hard to consider the issue in the future.  
364. 
Indonesia noted it also faced difficulties with respect to ensuring consistency between its domestic 
regulations and proposed CMMs, as commented on by FFA and PNA members. It noted it still faced issues 
with respect to anchored FADs and inquired if a solution could be found that did not require changing the 
FAD definition. 
365. 
New Zealand observed the need to avoid undermining the effect of FAD closures and suggested 
other means could be found to address the “chopstick” compliance issue that had been raised.  
366. 
The Commission agreed the FAD Management Options Intersessional Working Group would 
meet in 2020 and that the Working Group would consider the report and recommendations of the second 
Joint t-RFMO FAD Management Working Group and report back to the Commission on the merits and 
relevance for tropical tunas of those recommendations. 
 
7.2.2.5 Other commercial fisheries for bigeye, skipjack and yellowfin 
367. 
The Chair introduced WCPFC16-2019-IP05_rev1, Catch and effort tables on tropical tuna CMMs, 
which is a direct reference from TCC15, relating to the difficulty in assessing compliance with paragraphs 
50 and 51 of CMM 2018-01; TCC15 asked WCPFC16 to clarify the interpretation and assessment of those 
provisions  
368. 
SPC stated that regarding the tasking by TCC15, it worked with the Philippines and Indonesia on a 
paper, but unfortunately could not complete the task. 
369. 
Indonesia stated that TCC15 had a long discussion on the assessment of “other commercial 
fisheries”, particularly for Indonesia and the Philippines, and reiterated its view on these fisheries for bigeye, 
skipjack and yellowfin. It noted that tuna fishing in Indonesia has been practiced by local fishermen, mostly 
using small boats, for many years, which gives them traditional fishing rights that also have value in the 
form of traditional knowledge. Moreover, the fish resource utilization rights are regulated and protected in 
Indonesia by the Law on Local Government and the Law on Protection and Empowerment of Fisherman. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
65  
  
Indonesia stated that catch limits for small scale fisheries will directly impact food security and livelihoods 
of small-scale fishers, and it will be very difficult to implement these in Indonesia. Indonesia is still having 
difficulty in determining the catch from its EEZ and territorial waters, which creates uncertainty in 
determining the effort levels of its tuna fisheries, including “other commercial fisheries”. Indonesia stated 
that it is trying to overcome these issues by improving its data collection system to obtain a reliable time 
series catch and effort data estimation by increasing the coverage of its port sampling, logbook and onboard 
observer program. To improve data collection Indonesia is developing an electronic fishing logbook system, 
which began implementation in October 2018. The e-logbook is obligatory for vessels above 30 GT and 
voluntary for vessels 30 GT and below. However, data improvement for “other commercial fisheries” 
remains a challenging process and source of uncertainty for Indonesia. Determining catch limits for these 
fisheries remains premature, because the exact catch baseline is still uncertain. Despite the challenges it 
faces, Indonesia has discussed the importance of “other commercial fisheries” with the Philippines and SPC, 
noting that the large range of uncertainties and the complexity of the fishery make it especially difficult to 
address the issue. Indonesia and SPC intend to have additional discussions on these fisheries in conjunction 
with the annual catch estimate workshop for Indonesia in 2020, and Indonesia proposes that Vietnam fully 
participate in the project with WPEA-ITM support. 
370. 
The Philippines stated that it believed that handlines in the Philippines should not be included as 
part of “other commercial fisheries” because of the size of the vessels and relatively low CPUE for each 
vessel. It stated that the general understanding of commercial fisheries does not cover these types of vessel 
— by international standards, only vessels that are more than 24m in length are considered commercial. 
Current handline (using pakuras) originated in General Santos City sometime in 2000, and that from 2001–
2005 the entire catch was landed in General Santos port. The fishing grounds where these vessels operated 
were mainly in Mindanao Sea (Celebes Sea), Sulu Sea and the waters in the Convention Area. Therefore, 
the arbitrary proportion of 20% of the total catch should only be applied to the landed catch in General 
Santos City. Eventually other areas in the Philippines started to operate small scale handlines, hence the 
increase in annual production. It noted, however, that the catch in recent years covers the total production 
of handlines nationwide, with only a small portion operating in the Pacific EEZ, even those that are landed 
in General Santos City. Thus the 20% estimated from beyond archipelagic waters in the Convention Area 
maybe applied only to landed catch in General Santos City. However, the Philippines proposed that this 
should be further studied, to enable determination of the actual catch from the Pacific EEZ, and stated the 
work was in progress with assistance from Peter Williams and others from the SPC. Beginning in 2020, the 
Philippines is planning to activate a system that will be able to track both the location and catch of each 
vessel. 
371. 
Australia, on behalf of FFA members, stated their continuing concern with the significant data gaps 
associated with non-purse seine and longline fisheries in the Philippines and Indonesia, and noted that while 
significant progress was being made, the absence of information for these fisheries was continuing to impede 
compliance reporting as demonstrated by the inability of the Commission to reach an assessment of these 
obligations in the final 2019 CMR. Australia stated that the situation also has substantial implications for 
determining appropriate limits and properly accounting for these fisheries in WCPFC’s management 
arrangements. The impacts on the Commission’s shared fisheries are substantial, particularly for yellowfin 
tuna, which is the most depleted tropical tuna stock. FFA members strongly supported the ongoing work of 
SPC, Indonesia and the Philippines through the WPEA project to improve data availability for these 
fisheries. FFA members recognised the challenges associated with these fisheries, and stated they were 
encouraged by the advice provided by Indonesia and the Philippines on steps taken to address these 
challenges. They strongly encouraged continuation of the work to ensure that WCPFC’s efforts to manage 
its stocks are not undermined. FFA members recommended that the Commission task SPC, in collaboration 
with Indonesia and the Philippines, to develop a paper containing all information on “other fisheries” to be 
presented to SC16 and TCC16, to review and advise the Commission with the aim of reviewing para.51 in 
the tropical tuna measure to ensure appropriate limits can be determined, measured and assessed in the CMS. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
66  
  
372. 
Indonesia noted that Vietnam is also a full participant in the WPEA project.  
373. 
EU stated it would work with FFA and encouraged the work by SPC. It noted the species ae highly 
migratory, and suggested all information, even from small-scale fisheries, is essential, and encouraged 
collection of fisheries data from those fisheries. The EU stated that TCC received some assurance from the 
delegations concerned that work would be done by WCPFC16 to progress the discussion, but observed that 
no reassurance was provided at WCPFC16 that this was likely to happen in the short term. The EU suggested 
making the tasking more precise, stating that it was necessary to define the data the Commission needs; and 
if the data do not exist, the Commission needs to know this so it can proceed accordingly. The EU also noted 
that the data available might not allow defining the levels indicated in CMM 2018-01 
374. 
China agreed with the EU’s suggestion that a clear reference limit on “other” commercial fisheries 
was needed. It observed that while Vietnam is included within the WPEA for the purpose of information 
exchange, its fishing area is outside the Convention Area.  
375. 
The Commission noted the progress being made in Indonesia and the Philippines in respect of 
data collection for other fisheries for bigeye, yellowfin and skipjack in their waters.  
376. 
The Commission tasked the Scientific Services Provider, in collaboration with Indonesia and the 
Philippines, to develop a paper containing all information on ‘other fisheries’ to be presented to the 
Scientific Committee and Technical Compliance Committee in 2020, to review and advise the 
Commission with the aim of reviewing paragraph 51 in CMM 2018-01 to ensure appropriate limits can 
be determined, measured and assessed in the Compliance Monitoring Scheme. 
 
7.2.2.6 New CMM for tropical tunas 
377. 
The Chair noted that CMM 2018-01 expires in 2020, and that a new measure was needed.  
378. 
Australia, on behalf of FFA members, noted that CMM 2018-01 is currently performing well, the 
stocks controlled by the measure are all within tolerances and the fisheries in the tropical area, particularly 
the purse-seine fisheries, are beginning to produce sustainable economic and social benefits for developing 
countries in the tropical area. The objectives of the measure are already expressed in terms that are easily 
translated into a harvest strategy approach and FFA members stated that it was likely to be fit for its purpose 
for another 3–4 years. They stated they saw no reason for significant change beyond addressing the 
requirements of paras 28 and 44. 
7.3 
South Pacific Albacore 
7.3.1 
Roadmap for effective conservation and management of South Pacific albacore 
379. 
Dr Graham Pilling (SPC-OFP) presented WCPFC16-2019-19 Alternative Trajectories to achieve 
the South Pacific albacore interim TRP. As requested by WCPFC15, the paper evaluates a range of 
alternative catch pathways and timeframes that achieve the interim TRP no later than 20 years. Following 
requests from SC15, the paper also evaluates effort-based management pathways that achieve the objective. 
These pathways are compared to “status quo” (2014–2016 average catch or effort) scenarios, which lead to 
stock declines. A wide range of management scenarios can be applied, and a small subset were examined in 
the paper. A recovery period of 20 years, the longest time period specified by WCPFC15, implies lower 
short-term impacts on fisheries compared to shorter recovery periods. However, the stock will decline in the 
short term if catch reductions are insufficient or management action is delayed. Overall management 
interventions would then need to be greater as stock recovery will be from a lower biomass level. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
67  
  
380. 
Samoa, on behalf of FFA members, introduced WCPFC16-2019-DP05, South Pacific Albacore 
Roadmap and Harvest Strategy. FFA members thanked SPC for the informative analyses on the catch and 
effort pathway options presented for deliberation, stating that it was clear there would be difficult decisions 
to make, especially on commitments to be made to achieve the agreed TRP, and asked all CCMs for their 
cooperation. They noted that South Pacific albacore is important to FFA members, who are committed to 
achieving the TRP in as short a time as economically possible. FFA members proposed reinvigorating the 
South Pacific Albacore IWG in 2020 and confirmed Fiji would chair the IWG. They stated they had taken 
the lead in providing revisions for the roadmap work plan to focus on three key elements: (i) an agreement 
on an overall TAC/TAE and a subsequent pathway to the TRP; (ii) a division of the overall TAC/TAE 
between the high seas and EEZs; and (iii) a measure for the implementation of overall TAC/TAE and/or 
subregional TACs/TAEs that recognises zone-based management, EEZ limits, data collection and reporting 
requirements until a harvest strategy is finalised and agreed. FFA members stated they were encouraged that 
China voiced their preference at SC15 for a TAC for this fishery as soon as possible. They looked forward 
to working with other CCMs, including through a face-to-face IWG meeting 2020 in conjunction with a 
meeting of one of the WCPFC’s subsidiary bodies. 
381. 
Fiji acknowledged the work and leadership by New Zealand since the adoption of an interim TRP 
for South Pacific Albacore at WCPFC15, and similarly thanked CCMs that had been actively engaged 
throughout the process. Fiji accepted the appointment as Chair of the South Pacific Albacore IWG and 
sought the continued support and active engagement of CCMs in 2020 as it reinvigorated a revised Roadmap 
and sought to make key decisions related to returning South Pacific albacore stocks to the TRP. Fiji noted 
that the albacore stock and its fisheries are critical to the livelihoods and wellbeing of its people, and makes 
up more than 80% of the sector’s contribution to Fiji’s gross domestic product, through 93 fishing vessels, 
5 processing companies, and the employment (directly and indirectly) of thousands of Fiji nationals. Fiji 
stated it has experienced low catches of albacore and the long-term viability of its fisheries and associated 
processing factories is grim. Fiji therefore called on CCMs to quickly work together to either (i) agree on 
harvest strategies, or (ii) adopt enhanced zone-based measures that recognize the existing measures adopted 
by FFA members in their zones, and MCS and reporting requirements, while finalizing harvest strategies. 
Fiji emphasised that any delay would most probably lead to the demise of their domestic industry and the 
thousands of people that depend on it. Fiji also raised a few key issues related to CMM 2013-07, specifically 
section 5 on the Support for Domestic Fisheries Sector and Tuna Fisheries Related Businesses and Market 
Access. These include (i) maximizing benefits from the development of their fisheries resources; (ii) that 
domestic fishing and related industries of SIDS in the Convention Area account for ~50% of the total catch 
and value of highly migratory fish stocks harvested in the Convention Area; and (iii) the need therefore to 
support investment and collaborative arrangements with SIDS and territories. Fiji reflected on the Harvest 
Strategy Workplan, and adoption of HCRs by 2021 for South Pacific albacore, and stated that one issue 
CCMs may encounter is the difficulty of remaining committed to this process. Fiji referenced the TRP 
adopted at WCPFC15 and stated that the sooner the fishery recovers to that point, the better it is for the 
people and national economies that are dependent on it, while acknowledging that this would not be an easy 
task, as the preliminary scenarios provided by SPC indicated. Acknowledging the differing development 
aspirations of CCMs, Fiji asked that the dialogue, decisions and collective actions remain focussed on how 
these shared stocks have created wealth and benefits for the people and national economies of CCMs, and 
reflected that this was an urgent call to action.  
382. 
New Caledonia stated that its longline fishery is highly dependent on the South Pacific albacore 
stock, which accounts for 70% of its catch; there is low fishing effort in New Caledonia’s EEZ, and 
managers and the fishing industry have worked cooperatively for decades with good results, but yields have 
decreased for the last 3 years, with no apparent explanation. Possible reasons include climate change, the 
strong fishing effort that occurs all around New Caledonia’s EEZ, especially in the high seas pocket to the 
south, or a combination of these. New Caledonia stressed that South Pacific albacore is vital both for food 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
68  
  
security and the fisheries industry. New Caledonia stated it would be fully involved in the work of the 
Commission on this issue and indicated the need to have face-to-face meeting so that issues could be 
discussed in detail. 
383. 
French Polynesia stated that South Pacific albacore is its main fishery and is very important in terms 
of profitability and food security. French Polynesia stated it would also actively participate in the roadmap 
IWG. Given the topics that must be addressed, French Polynesia supported face to face meetings.  
384. 
The United States stated that its fishery operating out of American Samoa is very reliant on South 
Pacific albacore, which is very important both culturally and economically. It noted that it was in the 
Commission’s best interest to reach the TRP as quickly as possible. It asked for more details on the proposed 
revisions to the workplan and supported in-person meetings of the IWG in 2020.  
385. 
China affirmed the importance of South Pacific albacore for China’s fleet and looked forward to 
discussions in the SWG. 
386. 
New Zealand, as outgoing chair of the Albacore Roadmap IWG, thanked all CCMs for their 
previous engagement, and looked forward to further work on the issues. It thanked Fiji for taking over as 
Chair and agreed that the Commission should work to reach the TRP as soon as economically feasible. 
387. 
Chinese Taipei affirmed the importance of South Pacific Albacore and supported the Roadmap IWG 
but stated it could not agree to replace the current workplan with the proposed workplan, and it would 
discuss further in the IWG.  
388. 
Samoa thanked all CCMs for their support. 
389. 
The EU stated that it catches South Pacific albacore as bycatch and noted that it had some concerns 
with WCPFC16-2019-DP05, noting the need to take into account the principles of the UNFSA and 
UNCLOS. In this context, it stated it saw no reason to strongly differentiate between the high seas and EEZs. 
It suggested the need to review the IATTC’s albacore management, and the need for close contact with 
IATTC in order to ensure sustainable management. Cook Islands encouraged CCMs not to be selective in 
making references to the need for consistency with international law.  
390. 
The Commission agreed to reinvigorate the South Pacific Albacore Roadmap Working Group in 
2020 under the leadership of Fiji and for it to continue to work intersessionally to develop the Roadmap 
for Effective Conservation and Management of South Pacific Albacore. 
391. 
The Commission further agreed that the South Pacific Albacore Roadmap Working Group would 
meet in the margins of SC16 and TCC16 and that during the intersessional period it would work to 
develop its workplan and terms of reference.  
 
7.3.2 
Performance indicators 
392. 
The Commission noted the progress on the development of performance indicators for South 
Pacific Albacore.  
 
 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
69  
  
7.3.3 
Harvest control rules and management strategy evaluation 
393. 
Dr Rob Scott (SPC-OFP) referenced to WCPFC16-2019-20 Performance indicators for comparing 
management procedures for South Pacific albacore using the MSE modelling framework (SC15-2019-MI-
WP03), and WCPFC16-2019-21 South Pacific albacore management strategy evaluation framework 
(SC15-2019-MI-WP08), and provided a brief presentation on the current status of the MSE framework for 
South Pacific albacore tuna and the design of the HCRs currently under investigation. It was noted that 
empirical MPs based on recent trends in CPUE were currently being investigated but that the option to 
investigate model-based MPs had not been ruled out. The HCRs currently under investigation for south 
Pacific albacore are based on the average level and distribution of catches for 2012–2014 and apply to all 
fisheries. CCMs were invited to propose alternative HCRs that could also be evaluated within the 
framework. 
394. 
In response to a query from Japan regarding how the Human Resource Development PI is assessed, 
SPC stated it is difficult to evaluate in an informative way. Some proxies could be applied: for example, if 
the stock is maintained around the TRP, that could be taken as enabling achievement of the human 
development objectives.  
395. 
In response to a query from Chinese Taipei regarding PI 12 (regarding Optimizing Capacity), SPC 
indicated this referred to optimizing capacity of the southern longline fishery but stated that optimal capacity 
in a fishery first had to be defined before it could be evaluated. 
396. 
The EU noted its understanding that SC recommended focusing on empirical HCRs and inquired if 
SPC had examined model-based HCRs. It inquired how a change in targeting would be addressed, as well 
as effort creep. SPC stated that questions were raised at SC regarding the HCR design for skipjack, including 
whether it should apply to all fleets in the fishery, and whether management should be through catch or 
effort. Regarding effort creep, SPC incorporated this for skipjack, and could investigate it for albacore. 
Although the recommendation was to first look at empirical approaches, the key challenge is identifying a 
CPUE trend that matches trends in the fishery. A model-based approach could be used.  
397. 
China inquired regarding (i) a PI for continuity of market supply; (ii) how food security is evaluated; 
and (iii) regarding the time frame for finishing the work of the South Pacific albacore HCR. SPC stated that 
both PI 7 and PI 8 seek to address stability and continuity of market supply. SPC is examining how to 
evaluate Food Security as a PI and may employ a proxy. Regarding the HCR workplan, it is somewhat 
dependent on the next stock assessment, which is scheduled for 2021.  
398. 
Chinese Taipei inquired whether predicted climate change impacts on recruitment should be used 
in the projection. SPC stated that there is significant uncertainty in the albacore framework regarding future 
recruitment. Climate change projections are long term (50–100 years), while the harvest strategy projection 
is for 30 years. SPC will try and reconcile these differences and include projected climate change impacts 
into the framework if possible. 
399. 
RMI on behalf of FFA members thanked SPC for the update on the harvest strategy work, stating 
that while they understand this is separate from the work to achieve the TRP, they understood the importance 
of endorsing required PIs for it to proceed. They encouraged SPC to continue these analyses and through 
the national harvest strategy workshops work to update and build the understanding of CCMs (and 
particularly SIDs) on these key components of the harvest strategies for the South Pacific albacore fishery. 
400. 
Japan inquired regarding changes in fishing mortality between a typical LRP and TRP. SPC stated 
that if a stock is at high level, the HCR simply says that either catch or effort can increase. Various HCRs 
have differing trade-offs; some maintain high biomass, while others have higher catch, but lower biomass 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
70  
  
as a result. Japan clarified that an HCR is likely based on the assumption that the stock will stay above the 
TRP. If a stock decreases, either F or effort must decline, while the stock will require recovery (through a 
recovery plan), and inquired whether the same HCR would be applied before and after reaching the TRP. 
SPC indicted that in the case of albacore the starting point is below the TRP, based on the 2018 SA. A stock 
rebuilding program, based on progressive catch controls, will have the objective of achieving the TRP at 
some point, followed by management procedures to maintain stocks at that level. If the recovery period is, 
for example, 10 years, then there is no immediate need for a HCR.  
401. 
The EU noted that the Commission was surprisingly discussing about “recovery” of a stock that 
was well above MSY levels. It noted the wide-scale mixing of South Pacific albacore between the EPO and 
WCPO as revealed by tagging, and that the stock assessment takes into account only the WCPO. The EU 
inquired whether there was scope to consider this mixing, and how it would affect SPC’s work. The EU also 
commented regarding PI 3 regarding maximizing economic yield, and noted that this was already taken into 
consideration by the TRP. the EU suggested that the PI was not well defined because the economic yield is 
being maximized for some fisheries, but minimized for others, and stressed the need to look at all aspects 
of the fishery. SPC stated that the issue of potential mixing in the EPO and WCPO was raised at SC15. The 
next stock assessment is scheduled for 2021; depending on the structure of that SA, it may be necessary to 
redesign the operating model. Ideally this would not have to happen but including the EPO would be a 
significant change.  
402. 
In response to a query from China regarding the various periods used, SPC noted that these were 
chosen based on an initial inspection of values. It is not necessary to have consistent 3-year periods. The 
management period is assumed to be 3 years; CPUE is measured every 3 years, with catch values revised 
based on that, while CPUE is calculated over 5-year intervals. These were chosen as they seem appropriate 
but could be changed if desired.  
403. 
The Commission noted the progress on the development of harvest control rules and management 
strategy evaluation for South Pacific albacore.  
 
7.3.4 
Review of CMM 2015-02 (South Pacific albacore) 
404. 
The following documents were noted for reference: WCPFC16-2019-18, Reference document for 
the review of CMM 2015-02 and development of harvest strategies under CMM 2014-06 (south Pacific 
albacore tuna); WCPFC16-2019-IP08 Trends in the South Pacific albacore longline and troll fisheries; and 
WCPFC16-2019-IP09 Summary of reporting received by WCPFC under CMM 2010-05 and CMM 2015-
02: South Pacific albacore.  
405. 
The Chair noted that the roadmap WG would discuss future CMMs.  
406. 
Tonga, on behalf of FFA members, stated that as confirmed in recent meetings of the Roadmap 
WG, FFA members considered that there was no need to revise the existing measure, which had failed to 
restrict the build-up of fishing effort for South Pacific albacore, and stated that they were instead focused 
on the development of a new measure based on moving the stock towards the TRP and recognising zone-
based limits to be established within EEZs and for fishing on the high seas. 
407. 
China noted the need for a comprehensive South Pacific albacore CMM and stated their hope that 
a new CMM would replace CMM 2015-02.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
71  
  
408. 
The Commission noted that possible future amendments to CMM 2015-02 would be among the 
matters to be considered through the South Pacific Albacore Roadmap Working Group.  
 
7.4 
Pacific bluefin  
7.4.1 
Harvest strategy for Pacific bluefin 
409. 
Mr Masanori Miyahara, Chair of the NC, presented the NC15 outcomes with respect to Pacific 
bluefin tuna. NC adopted a harvest strategy for Pacific bluefin in 2017, and the stock is projected to rebuild 
in accordance with the HCR. NC15 held a long discussion on the possibility of increasing the catch limits 
for Pacific bluefin. He noted some members (notably Japan and Korea) face difficulties in controlling coastal 
fishery activities, especially given recent very favourable recruitment, and sought an increase in the catch 
limits; other members expressed concerns and preferred to wait for the results of the 2020 benchmark stock 
assessment. As a result, NC members did not achieve a consensus to recommend an increase in the catch 
limits. But NC15 agreed upon increased flexibility within the existing CMM (in the revised CMM), for 2020 
only, an increase in the carry-over from 5% to 17%, the figure chosen for consistency of management 
measures between the eastern (IATTC) and western Pacific (WCPFC). The revised CMM also allows for a 
transfer of catch limit of 300 t from Chinese Taipei to Japan for 2020. The NC also agreed on TORs for the 
Pacific bluefin tuna MSE (Attachment F of the NC15 Summary report), and adopted Candidate Reference 
Points (Attachment G of the NC15 Summary report). 
410. 
Tuvalu, on behalf of FFA members, noted their continuing serious concerns at the extremely low 
status of the Pacific bluefin stock. They stated their concern at (i) the lengths Japan has gone to seek special 
arrangements to allow for increased catches in 2020, in particular a transfer of allocation from another CCM, 
although there are no provisions for quota transfer in the existing measure; and (ii) the dramatic increase in 
allowed carryover of underage from 5% to 17% of the 2019 annual initial catch limit for all CCMs. FFA 
members acknowledged that the principle of the Harvest Strategy approach does allow for the possibility of 
a catch increase, but stated they were strongly of the opinion that this should be considered in conjunction 
with the results of the full stock assessment and not to be the subject of lengthy negotiations of special 
arrangements favouring Japan during intervening years. 
411. 
The EU expressed concern that the Pacific bluefin stock is still in very poor condition. It noted the 
efforts toward recovery and requested that NC provide more detailed information on this and other northern 
species in poor status in the future. In response the NC Chair reviewed the history of the NC, referenced 
prior requests by the Commission regarding presentation of NC measures, and stated that he would present 
additional information in the future if that was desired.  
412. 
The United States noted that the NC had made a very serious effort to rebuild the Pacific bluefin 
stock, which is proving successful. It noted that the rebuilding plan allows for consideration of catch 
increases, if rebuilding is expected to continue with a high degree of certainty. The United States noted the 
NC was not proposing any catch increases in the revised CMM, but the revised CMM would allow for 
carryover, because of the economic implications. It noted there are no prohibitions to carryover of catch 
limits within the existing CMM. 
413. 
Solomon Islands, on behalf of PNA members, supported the FFA statement, and said they 
appreciated the work that had gone into the proposal for a revised Pacific bluefin measure. However, they 
noted that with the spawning biomass at 3% of the unfished level and overfishing continuing, they 
considered that this was not the time to be making ad hoc adjustments to the CMM that would clearly 
increase catches in 2020. Given that a new assessment will be performed in 2020, any further action should 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
72  
  
wait for the results of that assessment. PNA members stated they did not support revisions to the measure 
at WCPFC16. 
414. 
Japan responded to some questions from FFA and PNA regarding the catch limit transfer from 
Chinese Taipei to Japan. Japan noted that WCPFC16-2019-22 contains the details; Table PBF-02 and 
Figure PDF-01(p. 4) show how rapidly the stock will rebuild. If the catch limit is not increased, the interim 
rebuilding target is projected to be reached in 2021 (> 60% probability), 3 years before the target of 2024, 
with a 97% probability of reaching the target in 2024. The projection assumes that catch made by Chinese 
Taipei would be more than its actual catch plus the transfer, thus, even if a transfer is made from Chinese 
Taipei to Japan, the stock is projected to achieve these targets as outlined.  
415. 
Tokelau, on behalf of PNA members, stated that with the stock at 3% of its unfished level, the 
management of Pacific bluefin tuna is a failure that reflects badly on all CCMs. When the approach to 
managing Pacific bluefin tuna is compared with that used for other stocks managed by the Commission, 
PNA members think that fishing on this stock should probably be closed and closed for a long time. They 
stated they agreed, with some reluctance, to an HCR with a slow rebuilding programme and were prepared 
to continue to support the HCR. They stated that the proposed changes are not part of the HCR and are being 
made on an ad hoc basis without any apparent exceptional circumstance that would justify taking action 
outside the HCR, and that any additional management actions should await the 2020 stock assessment. 
416. 
PNG sought clarification regarding paragraph 11 of the NC Summary Report with regard to the 
50/50 split of any catch limit increases to IATTC and WCPO. The United States indicated that this restated 
the outcome of a joint IATTC and NC WG meeting, which were acted on by NC. The working group used 
a pan-ocean management approach and agreed that any catch increases must address the distribution of 
fishing opportunities across both commissions.  
417. 
Japan addressed the comment by the PNA that the fact that the 3% SB/SBF=0 level means the fishery 
should be closed. It noted that while this could be done, PBF is taken by a coastal fishery, with most catch 
taken in inland and territorial waters, with 20,000 small-scale coastal fishermen and over 1,000 set nets. 
Closing the bluefin fishery would require giving up all other species in the multispecies fisheries and would 
negatively impact many fishermen. Japan noted while the 2014 recruitment was the lowest in history, it has 
since recovered, and 2016 recruitment was almost twice the projected level; these are now becoming adult 
fish and being caught. It stressed the NC decided not to recommend a change in the catch limit, and that the 
objectives, as endorsed by WCPFC, were being met. It noted the HCR was not being used in 2019. 
418. 
The ISC representative clarified that the method used in the projection uses F as well as the catch 
limit to evaluate the probability of achieving certain targets. The model assumes Chinese Taipei catches 900 
t or 1000 t, while the actual catch is below 500 t; thus, the transfer from Chinese Taipei to Japan would not 
affect the projection. Regarding the carryover increase (from 5% to 17%), it is difficult to simulate what 
effect this will have, but over time it will not increase total catch. He noted that not all countries are using 
their total quota and observed that the impact on the stock if they did could be negative, but would not be 
very large. 
419. 
China noted in relation to the ISC intervention that the stock is subject to rebuilding. It stated that 
in ICCAT such transfers are allowed and voiced its support for the transfer from Chinese Taipei to Japan.  
420. 
Japan noted that some CCMs members had expressed concerns and suggested the need for more 
dialogue. Japan noted its view that prior consultation is very important and observed it had previously 
explained its domestic situation with respect to this issue to FFA and PNA members, including through the 
use of videos, photos and data.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
73  
  
421. 
The Commission noted the update from the Northern Committee on the progress on the 
development of a harvest strategy for Pacific Bluefin. 
 
7.4.2 
Review of CMM 2018-02 and consideration of any proposed amendments 
422. 
The Chair of the Northern Committee introduced the proposed revision to CMM 2018-02 as 
approved by NC15, with reference to WCPFC16-2019-22 Reference Document for the Review of CMM 
2018-02 and Development of Harvest Strategies (which provides a quick reference guide to the 
recommendations of the SC, NC and TCC of relevance to the discussions on stock status 
and management advice for Pacific bluefin tuna) and WCPFC16-2019-IP10 Compiled information 
on Pacific bluefin tuna fishing effort and catch. 
423. 
The NC Vice-Chair (USA) stated that the NC met briefly on the margins of WCPFC16 to consider 
two outstanding NC recommendations. Changes that CCMs discussed were largely adopted by NC, both for 
CMM 2018-02, and for the harvest strategy for North Pacific swordfish (discussed under Agenda Item 
7.6.1).  
424. 
The EU stated that taking into account the constraints and difficulties expressed by Japan it would 
not oppose the revised proposal to amend CMM 2018-02. It commented in relation to the reporting 
requirement that allows some CCMs to report not in the calendar year but the management year, stating that 
TCC had struggled to assess compliance with limits in situations where this was the case. The EU stressed 
this was not a very meaningful way of reporting against limits and that its generalisation should be avoided.  
425. 
Pew, on behalf of Pew, WWF, and The Ocean Foundation, expressed concern that the revised CMM 
for Pacific bluefin would increase the size of the allowed carry over and allow transfer of quota in 2020, 
which would effectively increase the catch of PBF for 2020. The stock remains severely depleted, at just 
3.3% of unfished biomass, and continues to experience overfishing. They stated that any increase in catch 
further jeopardizes the recovery of the species, reducing the probability that the rebuilding targets agreed to 
by the Commission will be met. The changes to CMM 2018-02 approved by WCPFC16 did not change the 
effects of the measure and Pew stated it is very concerned that it was accepted by the Commission. ISC will 
perform a full benchmark assessment of the stock in 2020 and Pew urged members to take the opportunity 
in 2020 to fully debate the implications and merits of the measure. 
 
426. 
The Commission adopted Conservation and Management Measure 2019-02, Attachment I* 
which amends CMM 2018-02 Conservation and Management Measure for Pacific Bluefin tuna.  
 
7.5 
North Pacific albacore 
7.5.1 
Harvest strategy for North Pacific albacore 
427. 
The NC Chair stated that the NC is developing a MSE for the stock; two stakeholder meetings have 
been held, and a TRP is under discussion. He stated that details are provided in the NC15 Summary Report 
(paragraphs 21–24).  
428. 
The Commission noted the update from the Northern Committee on the progress on the 
development of a harvest strategy for North Pacific albacore. 
 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
74  
  
7.5.2 
Review of CMM 2005-03 and consideration of any proposed amendments 
429. 
The Commission considered WCPFC16-2019-23 Reference document for review of CMM 2005-
03 and development of harvest strategies and WCPFC16-2019-IP11 Updated information on North Pacific 
Albacore effort data. The NC Chair stated that revision of CMM 2005-03 had been under discussion for 
some time. NC recommended slightly amending the CMM by removing the 6-month reporting requirement, 
which is not required by IATTC.  
430. 
In response to a query from Vanuatu, the United States stated that para. 4 of CMM 2005-03 requires 
that “All CCMs shall report annually to the WCPFC Commission all catches of albacore north of the equator 
and all fishing effort north of the equator in fisheries directed at albacore.”  
431. 
The Commission adopted Conservation and Management Measure 2019-03, Attachment J* 
which amends CMM 2005-03 Conservation and Management Measure for North Pacific Albacore, by 
removing the reporting requirement set out in paragraph 3. 
 
7.6 
North Pacific swordfish 
7.6.1 
Harvest strategy for North Pacific swordfish fisheries 
432. 
The NC Chair stated that the North Pacific swordfish stock is in good condition and noted the 
following: NC15 agreed on a harvest strategy for the stock; and if the harvest strategy is approved by the 
Commission NC will approve specific management measures. The harvest strategy objective is maintaining 
the stock around MSY level. The exploitation rate (F-limit) LRP is FMSY. A TRP will be developed later. 
The F-limit rule is as follows: in the event that average exploitation rate for the most recent period has been 
found, with at least 50% probability, to exceed the F limit, the NC will formulate CMM recommendations 
designed to reduce, with over 50% probability, the F rate below the F-limit as soon as possible. 
433. 
In response to queries from the EU regarding the use of FMSY as the LRP, the United States noted 
that, because a reliable estimate of steepness is available, the stock of North Pacific swordfish is to be treated 
as a Level 1 stock under the Commission’s hierarchical approach for setting biological LRPs. The LRP for 
the exploitation rate (F-limit) is thus FMSY. 
434. 
The Commission accepted the recommendation from the Northern Committee on a harvest 
strategy for North Pacific Swordfish (Attachment K*). 
 
7.7 
North Pacific striped marlin  
 
 
7.7.1 
 Limit reference point for North Pacific striped marlin 
435. 
The NC Chair stated that NC15 had discussed a consultative proposal for a rebuilding plan and 
requested that ISC provide advice on which future recruitment scenario might be the most likely over the 
near term. NC15 also requested the ISC to explain why the striped marlin stock decreased and the fishing 
mortality increased after a drastic decrease in fishing effort by high seas driftnet fisheries in the early 1990s. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
75  
  
7.7.2 
Review of CMM 2010-01 and consideration of any proposal for a rebuilding plan 
436. 
The Chair referenced WCPFC16-2019-DP12 Rebuilding Plan for North Pacific Striped Marlin, 
and WCPFC16-2019-24, Reference document for the review of CMM 2010-01 and development of Harvest 
Strategies for North Pacific Striped Marlin (Kajikia audax).  
437. 
The United States noted that the 2019 stock assessment for North Pacific Striped marlin found the 
stock is both overfished and experiencing overfishing, relative to MSY-based reference points. Given the 
concerns regarding the stock, WCPFC 15 strongly encouraged CCMs to submit a rebuilding plan, which the 
United States submitted to WCPFC16 in the form of WCPFC16-2019-DP12. The United States highlighted 
that the plan includes no changes to the CMM for North Pacific striped marlin; but it does contain a 
rebuilding target and a timeline and probability level for reaching the targets. The proposed rebuilding target 
is 20%SSBF=0 to be reached by 2039, with at least 60% probability.  
438. 
FSM, on behalf of FFA members, stated that the issue was of major concern to FFA members. They 
thanked the United States for their proposed rebuilding plan and called on the Commission, with the support 
of CCMs in whose waters the fishery takes place, to take action as a matter of priority. Noting the proposed 
rebuilding target for North Pacific striped marlin FFA members stated that this at least represented a start, 
albeit one delayed for too long. They noted the proposed time frame of 20 years to reach the LRP, which 
was the point at which the Commission would ordinarily be considering taking immediate action to reduce 
fishing mortality and rebuild the stock. FFA members stated their hope that action could now be agreed 
upon and stated they would support a more ambitious timeframe to rebuild the stock to the LRP. They 
looked forward to some positive action with North Pacific striped marlin and other northern stocks that are 
also at depleted levels in order to align the stocks with the management of stocks in other tropical and 
southern areas. 
439. 
The EU requested that the NC provide additional information on the stock to WCPFC17, including 
which members are involved in the fishery. Regarding the rebuilding plan, it noted that at WCPFC15 CCMs 
raised concerns about the status of the stock, and that a commitment was made that at WCPFC16 the most 
recent information along with a complete rebuilding plan would be presented. It noted that DP12 provided 
an objective and timeframe, but no indication of how this was to be achieved. The EU suggested discussions 
to determine if additional elements could be added. 
440. 
Japan clarified that North Pacific striped marlin is not recognized as a northern stock, under the 
purview of the NC, but is to be managed by WCPFC. It thanked the United States for developing the 
proposed rebuilding plan, while noting that the 2019 stock assessment undertaken by ISC had quite 
divergent results, depending on which of two recruitment scenarios was used; ISC was unable to determine 
which scenario was more likely. Japan noted that North Pacific striped marlin stocks started declining 
following the cessation of high-seas drift net fishing in the 1990s when the fishing mortality was much 
higher, and that the reasons were not clear. Japan stated it could support the rebuilding target, but noted that 
the time frame and the probability of reaching the target were uncertain, and perhaps better determined 
following receipt of additional information from ISC. 
441. 
The United States confirmed that while North Pacific striped marlin was a North Pacific species, it 
had not been designated as a NC stock, meaning it was up to all CCMs to rebuild the stock. The United 
States stated that in its view the rebuilding plan and actions needed to realize the plan’s objectives are 
distinct. The plan defines the objectives, but does not take steps to control fishing effort, which would be 
part of a rebuilding strategy. The United States noted the uncertainty in the stock assessment, especially 
regarding the recruitment scenario, and the projected recovery timeframe. The United States looked forward 
to working with Japan with the hopes of adopting a rebuilding plan during WCPFC16. 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
76  
  
442. 
PNG supported the comments made by Japan and thanked the United States for the plan. 
443. 
The Chair recalled that during WCPFC15 a lengthy discussion was held on possible designation of 
the stock as a northern stock (and therefore under the NC), but that this had not been done, and stated the 
Commission would not revisit that issue. She noted that ISC provided information and advice to the 
Commission. In response to further queries from CCMs, the Secretariat confirmed that WCPFC and ISC 
has a formal relationship and cooperate through a formal MOU the details of which are provided in the 
Relations with Other Organisations section of the Commission’s website. 
444. 
RMI inquired regarding the obligations of CCMs that are not members of either the NC or ISC. 
445. 
Following further consultations among CCMs, the United States stated that based on feedback 
regarding the recruitment uncertainty, the rebuilding pan would be considered an interim plan, which would 
be updated following additional advice from SC regarding future recruitment. The United States then sought 
further input from CCMs regarding the timeline. 
446. 
The EU thanked the United States and other CCMs for finding a way to make progress. The EU 
stated that their preference would be that the timeframe be 2029, because the Commission adopted a CMM 
aiming at rebuilding the stock 10 years previously, effectively making 2029 a 20-year target.  
447. 
Japan suggested adopting 2029 with the proviso that the plan be subject to further consultations, in 
anticipation of further advice from ISC. The EU stated it could agree with Japan’s proposal. 
448. 
Chinese Taipei noted that the current F was around FMSY, and that the species was bycatch for many 
CCMs. Regarding the rebuilding objective, it stated that 20% SSBF=0 was over MSY, and thus very high. 
They stated that if the Commission chose a 10-year (2029) target, there would be large impacts on those 
fisheries where the species is caught as bycatch. Chinese Taipei stated its preference was to use 2039, but 
that it would compromise with a target of 2034. 
449. 
Japan stated it could support 2034, but would look to further scientific advice from ISC, probably 
in the form of Kobe metrics showing probabilities for various years; the best one would then be selected, 
taking into account socioeconomic factors. This could then change the target.  
450. 
The EU stated that the stock is heavily depleted, meaning F for the current level of biomass is 
excessive. The EU also stated that the previous stock assessment stated that biomass estimates were very 
optimistic. The EU agreed reluctantly with proposed 2034 and stated that it should be considered again in 
2020 based on the most recent scientific advice. 
451. 
The Chair noted the support among CCMs for a 2034 timeframe to reach the target, subject to further 
consideration in 2020.  
452. 
The Commission adopted the Interim Rebuilding Plan for North Pacific Striped Marlin 
(Attachment L*). 
 
7.8 
South Pacific striped marlin 
7.8.1 
Limit reference point for South Pacific striped marlin 
453. 
Dr Graham Pilling (SPC) provided background on recommendation points from SC and TCC on 
the review of the CMM for Southwest Pacific stripe marlin, WCPFC16-2019-25, Reference Document for 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
77  
  
the review of CMM 2006-04. He stated that as a billfish stock South Pacific striped marlin has no agreed 
LRPs. SPC thus uses default MSY reference levels when reporting stock status, and on that basis the stock 
is likely overfished and subject to overfishing. SC discussed whether MSY is appropriate as a reference 
level for these stocks. It is a biological limit under which the stock may be subject to reduced recruitment, 
which triggers concerns. SC needs to advise on the setting of a LRP; a level of 20% of SBF=0 could be 
considered. Regarding geographic range, the current CMM applies S of 15° S. The most recent assessment 
raised concerns regarding catch between 15° S and the equator, which is not currently controlled by the 
CMM. The recommendation extends the northern boundary to the equator.  
454. 
The Chair noted the two questions that had been raised by SC and SPC: is an LRP of 20% of SBF=0 
appropriate; and should the boundary of the CMM be extended to the equator, and invited comments by 
CCMs.  
455. 
The EU stated it did not share the same understanding; it stated that as indicated by SPC, the LRP 
must be biologically based, and indicate a limit beyond which there is a risk for a given stock to face 
impaired recruitment, collapse or something similar. The EU stated that SC should explore what that LRP 
should be and argued that it should not be 20% of SBF=0. It noted that this was used by the United States in 
its proposal not as a limit but a rebuilding target, and that the Commission had not agreed that there would 
be specific biological risk to the stock at that point. The EU stated it would be useful to expand the 
geographic scope of the CMM.  
456. 
Australia stated that a hierarchical approach to determining LRPs provides precautionary LRPs for 
species such as tuna and billfish. It stated it was comfortable with asking SC whether this could be applied 
to billfish. Chinese Taipei also agreed that SC could examine the issue and suggested more information 
would be useful.  
457. 
China stated that action was premature for what it considers a bycatch species. It stated that to decide 
whether to extend the CMM’s effective area to the equator it would require more information on the 
implications for China’s fleet. It suggested discussing the issues at SC16 and making a decision at 
WCPFC17. 
458. 
New Zealand, on behalf of FFA members stated its concern with the stock status of South Pacific 
striped marlin, stating that the results of the assessment were worrying, indicating the spawning biomass is 
less than SBMSY and below 20% of SBF=0. Moreover, negative recruitment was seen in the three last stock 
assessments (2006, 2012 and 2019). While acknowledging it is difficult to specifically manage the stock, 
given that it is bycatch, FFA members stated it is an important stock for sport fisheries and thus tourism. 
FFA members considered this a priority and aim to bring forward proposals to address the situation at 
WCPFC17. For the SC15 recommendation to the WCPFC16 to identify an appropriate LRP for the stock, 
FFA members suggested this be referred back to the SC to identify a LRP and then be returned to the 
Commission for a decision. They noted the need for more effective measures to reduce the overall catch and 
stated this would be considered in developing FFA proposals for 2020.  
459. 
The Commission noted with concern the current status of South Pacific striped marlin and agreed 
to revisit the limit reference point in 2020 at WCPFC17.  
 
7.9 
Others — SW Pacific broadbill swordfish  
460. 
Australia, on behalf of FFA members, noted that WCPFC has an obligation to manage South Pacific 
Swordfish in the Convention Area, in a manner consistent with the objectives of the Convention. It stated 
that South Pacific Swordfish are a valuable resource and an important economic contributor to a number of 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
78  
  
WCPFC member fisheries and presents a fishery development opportunity for SIDS) and Participating 
Territories in the stock area. Australia noted that in its current form, the swordfish CMM (CMM 2009-03) 
does not ensure the ongoing sustainability of swordfish in this region, the ongoing economic viability of 
current fisheries nor future development opportunities for SIDS and participating territory fisheries, noting 
that:  
i. 
Between the equator and 20°S – There is currently no restriction on catch or effort for swordfish 
in this area, where catch on the high seas has increased substantially since CMM 2009-03 was 
developed. SC13 identified that the Commission should consider developing appropriate 
management measures for this area.  
ii. South of 20°S – The most recent stock assessment estimated a 32% probability of overfishing. 
However, fully caught catch limits south of 20°S combined with recent catches north of 20°S would 
substantially increase the probability of overfishing and an overfished stock.  
iii. Sub-regional depletion – The movement and aggregation behaviours of this species make it 
particularly vulnerable to subregional depletion, a key risk to the economic viability and development 
potential for coastal State fisheries in particular.  
iv. South East Pacific management – there is potential connectivity between the south-eastern WCPFC 
area and the adjacent South East Pacific Ocean (SEPO). The SEPO has seen very substantial 
increases in catch, but has no CMM, and no stock assessment since 2011.  
 
461. 
Recognising these issues and risks, Australia stated that it sought support of WCPFC members to 
strengthen CMM 2009-03, so as to ensure the ongoing sustainability of the stock regionally, ongoing 
economic viability of existing WCPFC member coastal State fisheries, and future development 
opportunities for SIDS and participating territories such that even stronger CMMs are not required in the 
future in response to an overfished stock, which could also impact tuna fisheries. Australia proposed that a 
future revised measure would apply in EEZs and high seas throughout the whole area of the stock (consistent 
with Article 3 and Article 5); be reflective of the current best understanding of swordfish science and its 
assessed status; prevent further increases in fishing mortality on the stock to avoid future overfishing and an 
overfished stock (consistent with Article 5); accommodate subregional zone-based management approaches 
and limits and ensure compatible management and limits on the high seas (consistent with Article 8); 
recognize the sovereign rights of coastal States to explore, exploit, conserve and manage HMS within areas 
under their national jurisdiction (consistent with Article 7); recognize the special requirements of, and avoid 
transferring a disproportionate burden of conservation upon, SIDS and participating territories (consistent 
with Article 30); and seek the development of a consistent set of CMMs for fish stocks that occur in both 
the WCPFC and IATTC Convention Areas (consistent with Article 22). Finally, FFA members noted the 
standing advice from SC relating to the need to strengthen provisions in CMM 2009-03 (Conservation and 
Management of Swordfish) and strongly encouraged Commission members to engage in discussions during 
2020 to achieve this outcome. 
462. 
New Zealand commended Australia for its proactive approach on the issue, stating it would be 
appropriate to approach IATTC with WCPFC’s concerns regarding the management of the species. It 
suggested the Chair write to IATTC with concerns regarding the need for a proactive approach to 
management of the stock in light of the concerns highlighted by Australia. 
463. 
Tonga, on behalf of FFA members also thanked Australia for the leadership role it had taken to 
improve the management of the stock and the consultative approach being taken to gauge the views CCMs. 
They noted that swordfish is of importance to a number of FFA members and express their broad support 
for the development of a CMM that recognises zone-based management and would seek to manage 
swordfish on the high seas to complement action taken within EEZs 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
79  
  
464. 
China thanked Australia for it work and stated that it agreed with some of the principles that had 
been addressed, including the application of the CMM in EEZs and the high seas. China also encouraged 
that WCPFC seek consistent measures with IATTC for shared fish stocks. It stated it would work with 
Australia to find a solution, although stated it was unsure if agreement could be reached in 2020. China 
noted that if a new measure was to be adopted China would find it challenging, but stated it was willing to 
work on the issue.  
465. 
The EU also thanked Australia for its work on the issue, stating that proactive work was welcome, 
and that it supported addressing management throughout the stock’s geographic range for all species. It 
agreed with the suggestion to collaborate with IATTC in view of taking into account the situation in the 
SEPO. It stated it would work with Australia to develop a tasking for SPC, including defining the fisheries, 
which could be difficult, as in many cases, in the area between the equator and 20oS this may be mainly 
bycatch. The EU noted that to date the stock remained within safe biological limits.  
466. 
French Polynesia supported the approach proposed by Australia for the revision of this CMM and 
stated that in particular because it is located in the overlap area, French Polynesia favours the development 
of a consistent approach to fish stocks at the Pacific Ocean level. 
467. 
Chinese Taipei thanked Australia for tabling the proposal and agreed with the remarks made by 
China. It supported application to both area the high seas and EEZs, but cannot support zone-based 
management, as it held that limit development should be flag-based.  It stated it was prepared to work with 
other CCMs to discuss the issue.  
468. 
New Caledonia stated that it has a very low catch of swordfish as bycatch but was very interested 
in the sustainability of the stock.  It supported the proposal. 
469. 
The Cook Islands stated that South Pacific swordfish is an important stock for its domestic fisheries 
and looked forward to working with Australia on the CMM. 
470. 
Australia thanked CCMs for their suggestions and support. It stated that undertaking projections 
(based on the status quo, fully caught limits, and max catch)1 would be critical for the robustness of the 
measure. It thanked the EU for assistance in developing text for the SPC tasking, while noting that, following 
meetings of the FAC during WCPFC16, this was no longer a funding priority for WCPFC. As a result, 
Australia stated it would provide a voluntary contribution to support the completion of the work by SPC. 
471. 
New Zealand thanked Australia for its proactive approach, and for providing a voluntary 
contribution to ensure it could be done.  
472. 
The EU thanked Australia for acknowledging the EU’s contribution in developing the roadmap. It 
raised the issue of timing, stating that a stock assessment would be conducted in 2021, which could involve 
significant changes in the stock assessment model. It suggested this would be very useful to inform 
discussions of any proposed amendments to the current CMM, and proposed that any projections be 
rescheduled to 2021, based on the new SA, with a management review of the fishery N of 20°S conducted 
in 2020. 
 
1  Status quo assumes recent (2016–2018) levels of fishing both north and south of 20°S. Fully caught limits assumes recent 
(2016–2018) levels of fishing north of 20°S and CCM-nominated maximum total catch levels (para 4 CMM 2009-13) of fishing 
south of 20°S. Max catch assumes peak (2011–2013) levels of fishing north 20°S and CCM-nominated maximum total catch 
levels (para 4 CMM 2009-13) of fishing south of 20°S. 
 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
80  
  
473. 
Australia stated the need to undertake the work on the basis of most recent currently available stock 
assessment, noting that the EU was suggesting waiting 2 years for the next assessment. It stated that this 
practice had not been followed for other species and argued it should not be necessary to wait that long to 
get the best possible scientific advice on how to proceed. Australia stated that SPC ran projections for 
tropical tunas in 2019, even though it would conduct stock assessments in 2020. Regarding the work on 
fisheries that take the species as bycatch, Australia stated that this would be directly addressed by the 
proposal, and self-funded by Australia.  
474. 
The EU stated that its view that (i) this was not a good use of SPC’s limited time because it would 
have to be repeated in 2 years; (ii) that the key priority was to understand the impact on the stock north of 
20oS; and (iii) the stock was assessed to be above MSY with 100% probability. It stated its interest in 
ensuring that the timing be correct and limited resources be employed to do the work correctly.  
475. 
New Zealand stated it supported Australia’s position on the issue and saw no reason to wait 2 years. 
Cook Islands noted that the species was very important for its local market and observed that SPC had not 
suggested it could not undertake the work. Cook Island also stressed that Australia was proposing to provide 
the funding.  
476. 
Australia stated it was confused and disappointed over the objections for the EU, which its suggested 
set a dangerous precedent, noting that the EU had a significant stake in the fishery, and thus has a stake in 
its sustainability. Australia stated that projection work did not concern current fishing mortality, but is about 
exploring whether the measure is effective under a range of scenarios and protects the future sustainability 
of the stock and that this work was critical for revision of the CMM.  Australia expressed concern that while 
there is a relatively new stock assessment, the CMM has not been considered or updated since 2009 and 
therefore the CMM is not reflective of the best available science. Australia stated that it was simply trying 
to ensure the Commission had the information to understand the current measure and help WCPFC members 
draft a new measure. Australia reiterated that the proposed work was not about current catch but rather about 
the future sustainability of the stock, the future economic viability of coastal state fisheries reliant on this 
stock (noting that coastal state domestic fleets cannot simply move to another region of the Pacific or another 
Ocean if depletion becomes too high) and for SIDS and developing territories – the future of their fishery 
development opportunities. 
477. 
SPC confirmed it could conduct the projections as part of its workload for 2020. 
478. 
The EU stated that it was supporting the work and roadmap but wanted to implement it stepwise, 
starting with the core issue in 2020 and pursuing it in 2021, noting that SC had not raised it as a concern or 
priority, with their advice recommending maintaining the current measure S of 20° S, and taking appropriate 
measure N of 20° S.  
479. 
Niue supported Australia’s proposal and thanked it for funding the work and expressed concern 
regarding the proposed delay. New Zealand registered its disappointment, as did Cook Islands, which stated 
that it was investing in swordfish research through small contributions, and was seeking to take a 
precautionary approach, noting that it could not move its islands the way other CCMs can move their vessels.  
480. 
CCMs held an extended discussion regarding the possible timing of the three actions put forward 
by Australia in its revised proposal. Many CCMs voiced their support for the work and schedule proposed 
by Australia; Australia thanked the various CCMs for their support for what it characterised as an important 
action that the Commission could undertake at no cost. The EU stated its view that not all CCMs’ comments 
necessarily reflected the actual status of the stock and supported conducting projections in 2021.The EU 
reiterated its position that any stock projections to be conducted by SPC be based on a the forthcoming stock 
assessment, while supporting conducting the tasks in paragraphs 2 and 3 of Australia’s proposal in 2020, 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
81  
  
which it stated were most important, and were supported by SC. Tokelau voiced its strong concern over the 
EU’s position, noting that the fishery was very important for some small Pacific Islands, which it stated 
were seeking to manage the stock sustainably for their people, through an approach consistent with that 
employed for skipjack and other stocks.  The EU expressed its concern with what seemed to be a lack of 
consistency in some CCMs position and indicated that for example, north Pacific striped marlin which is 
severely depleted did not trigger much enthusiasm or eagerness to address urgently its dire conservation 
status. Unfortunately, the EU proposal for an ambitious rebuilding plan for that species did not gather any 
support, whereas southwest Pacific swordfish, which is assessed to be above MSY with 100% probability, 
triggered reactions from some FFA members that did not seem to take into account key facts such as the 
stock status and scientific advice. 
481. 
The Commission tasked the Scientific Committee in 2021 (SC17) to provide an evaluation of the 
long-term future of the southwest Pacific swordfish stock status under CMM 2009-03 based upon the 
latest SC-agreed stock assessment, utilising a limited number of projections. Projections should include: 
a. “Status quo” – this projection will assume recent (2016 to 2018) levels of fishing both north and 
south of 20°S.  
b. “Fully caught limits” – this projection will assume recent (2016 to 2018) levels of fishing north 
of 20°S and CCM-nominated maximum total catch levels (para 4 CMM 2009-13) of fishing south 
of 20°S. 
c. “Max catch” - this projection will assume peak (2011 to 2013) levels of fishing north 20°S and 
CCM nominated maximum total catch levels (para 4 CMM 2009-13) of fishing south of 20°S. 
d. An additional limited number of projections which assume a range of fixed catch scenarios that 
are a percentage above and below “status quo” (such as -10% and +10%) that result in a range of 
upward and downward longterm biomass trends. 
WCPFC16 noted that this work would be funded via a voluntary contribution by Australia so as to 
not impact on Commission budget allocations for other priority work. 
482. 
The Commission tasked the Scientific Committee in 2020 (SC16) to consider a review (self-
funded and developed by Australia, in consultation with interested CCMs) of possible measures and 
options relevant to the management of swordfish taken as bycatch in longline fisheries. The review may 
include information from available research and literature, logbook and observer data (in appropriately 
aggregated forms).  
483. 
The Commission requested the WCPFC Chair to write to the IATTC Chair to: 
a. Express the Commission’s significant concern over the lack of scientific assessment and specific 
management measures for South Pacific Swordfish in the IATTC area;  
b. Seek that the IATTC prioritise the development of a management measure that ensures catch 
levels are maintained within sustainable levels, and 
c. Urge cooperation between IATTC and WCPFC on this issue.  
 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
82  
  
AGENDA ITEM 8 — WCPO SHARK STOCKS AND BYCATCH MITIGATION  
8.1 
Review of existing shark measures and consideration of limit reference points for sharks  
484. 
The Commission noted that the Scientific Committee is working on appropriate LRPs under 
Project 103 and encouraged the Scientific Committee to develop appropriate LRPs given their importance 
in harvest strategies. 
 
8.2 
Proposal for a comprehensive CMM for sharks and rays  
485. 
The Shark IWG Chair reviewed the efforts undertaken by the working group and presented a final 
draft CMM for sharks.  
486. 
New Zealand, joined by China, thanked the Shark IWG Chair for his hard work and supported 
adoption of the CMM.  
487. 
Australia, on behalf of FFA members, welcomed the work done over the preceding two years to 
consolidate the broad suite of shark measures into a single, comprehensive measure. They congratulated 
Japan for its leadership on this difficult but worthwhile task. FFA members advocated for a process to 
consolidate the measures to ensure that the Commission is meeting its goals of mitigating the impact of tuna 
fisheries on sharks stocks effectively. In particular, they welcomed the efforts by Japan to look for alternative 
methods to ensure full utilisation of sharks, which has always been a key goal of WCPFC’s shark CMMs. 
They noted this as a significant step forward for the Commission, stating they were very pleased to adopt 
the CMM and welcomed the constructive engagement of all CCMs in developing the comprehensive shark 
and ray CMM.  
488. 
The EU congratulated the Chair of the Shark IWG, and complemented him for his competence, 
resilience and patience. The EU stated that the adoption of the new CMM on sharks is an important step 
forward towards the sustainable management of sharks. However, the new measure still has some potential 
gaps that should be improved in the future, notably taking into account lessons learned on the 
implementation of the monitoring procedures enabling inspectors to identify and match carcasses and 
corresponding fins. It asked whether the Mobulid ray text should be incorporated in the CMM. The Shark 
IWG Chair stated he had considered this but stated that it would be very cumbersome to update the 
comprehensive CMM each time a new CMM is adopted. He suggested the Commission consider updating 
the comprehensive Shark CMM every 3 or 5 years. 
489. 
PNG, on behalf of the PNA, stated they appreciated the hard work and the huge effort by the Shark 
IWG Chair, and joined in voicing appreciation and support to the Shark IWG chair, and voiced support for 
adopting the measure. 
490. 
Chinese Taipei stated sharks are very important to it and it voiced its congratulations to the Shark 
IWG Chair for a difficult task and expressed its support for the new CMM. 
491. 
In adopting this CMM, Japan stated that the main reason for supporting this CMM was that WCPFC 
has the high-seas boarding and inspection scheme and the adoption of this CMM should not be a precedent 
for Japan in other RFMOs without such scheme. 
492. 
WWF, on behalf of WWF, Pew, SFP, and The Ocean Foundation stated that sharks and rays 
continue to make up a large percentage of annual bycatch, which current stock assessment trends suggest is 
unsustainable. They stated that in the last 9 months, both shortfin and longfin mako sharks have been 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
83  
  
upgraded to endangered and the previous day oceanic whitetip was elevated to critically endangered on the 
IUCN Red List. The recent stock assessment for oceanic whitetip shark presented at SC15 highlighted a 
dramatic collapse in what was once one of the most abundant pelagic sharks in the Pacific. Spawning stock 
biomass is estimated to be likely less than 5% of its unfished biomass and the species is predicted to become 
extinct in the WCPO under current levels of fishing mortality despite a no-retention measure. With that in 
mind, WWF stated it continued to support recommendations from SC15 for oceanic whitetip shark, 
including improved observer coverage and data; further efforts to mitigate catch, including closer adherence 
to the best practices in safe release; and the urgent development of a precautionary LRP for the stock. 
Overall, WWF stated they remain increasingly concerned about shark conservation and sustainability in the 
WCPO region but suggested that urgent action is required to further reduce fishing mortality on oceanic 
whitetip so as to enable the population to rebuild. They stated they appreciated the progress the Shark IWG 
had made toward agreed recommendations for a Comprehensive Shark CMM at WCPFC16, and they noted 
several important provisions were removed or watered down. They supported recommendations within the 
proposed CMM to include methods to further prohibit finning and incorporate the necessary language to 
encourage CCMs to land sharks with their fins naturally attached, specifically the elimination of the 5% fin 
to carcass ratio that was proven repeatedly to be ineffective. They also supported recommendations such as 
those for capacity building. However, they stated they were very disappointed that the provisions to prohibit 
both shark lines and wire leads, which the best available science suggests would further reduce the mortality 
of vulnerable species like oceanic whitetip shark, were not adopted. They suggested that because the 
Commission is unable to implement simple mitigation measures such as these to avoid unnecessary 
mortality of oceanic whitetip shark and other vulnerable species, other measures to reduce fishing mortality, 
such as time and area closures, should be explored as a matter of priority. Lastly, they stated their 
disappointment that, despite the framing of this measure as a “comprehensive” or “omnibus” measure, the 
final version of the Shark CMM lacks key components of good fisheries management practice. WWF urged 
the Commission to consider amending this measure to include: (i) a directive to establish recovery plans as 
the appropriate management response for heavily depleted species, and (ii) a mechanism and requirement 
to establish LRPs for all key shark and ray species consistent with the WCPF Convention.  
493. 
The Commission adopted Conservation and Management Measure for Sharks (Conservation 
and Management Measure 2019-04, Attachment M*). The Commission further agreed that this 
measure would become effective on 01 November 2020 and that it shall replace CMM 2010-07 
Conservation and Management Measure for Sharks, CMM 2011-04 Conservation and Management 
Measure for Oceanic Whitetip Sharks, CMM 2012-04 Conservation and Management Measure for the 
protection of whale sharks from purse seine operations, CMM 2013-08 Conservation and Management 
Measure for Silky Sharks, and CMM 2014-05 Conservation and Management Measure for Sharks at that 
time.  
494. 
The Commission also agreed that there would be an additional twelve-month period before 
Indonesia is expected to implement the new shark conservation and management measure. 
 
8.3 
Review of CMM 2018-03 on Seabirds  
495. 
New Zealand introduced the review of CMM 2018-03 by stating it has the highest global diversity 
of albatross and petrel species in the world, with several species assessed as being at high or very high risk 
from commercial fisheries bycatch, and as a result the protection of seabirds is of great importance to New 
Zealand. Bycatch in pelagic longline fisheries is one of the greatest threats to seabirds, particularly 
albatrosses and petrels. New Zealand stated its concern that despite the implementation of a CMM since 
2006 to reduce seabird bycatch, Project 68 estimates bycatch levels as high as 13,000–19,000 birds per year, 
not including cryptic mortality. This includes a high proportion of seabird bycatch in the northern Pacific. 
SC, reflecting estimates from Project 68, noted that longline fisheries north of 20°N accounted for 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
84  
  
approximately two-thirds of total seabird mortalities, while longline fisheries south of 30°S accounted for 
approximately one-quarter of seabird mortalities. New Zealand emphasised the need to consider ways to 
reduce seabird bycatch and mortality as a result of longline fishing, and accordingly proposed adoption of 
non-binding guidelines for the handling and safe release of seabirds, as outlined in WCPFC16-2019-DP07, 
Proposal on guidelines for the safe-handling and release of seabirds. The proposed guidelines represent 
best practice advice developed by ACAP. The guidelines were endorsed by SC15, and New Zealand also 
highlighted the proposal at TCC15. New Zealand also stated it was grateful for the support of its FFA 
partners. The proposal aims to meet the requirements of paragraph 11 of CMM 2018-03 — ensuring that 
seabirds captured alive are released alive in as good a condition as possible. Wherever possible, hooks are 
removed without jeopardizing the life of the seabird concerned. As noted by SC15 some seabirds are 
captured and released alive, with higher chances of survival when safe handling procedures are 
implemented. Together with the implementation of effective seabird bycatch mitigation measures, safe 
handling and release of seabirds will help reduce the impact of pelagic longline and other hook fisheries 
bycatch on these vulnerable seabirds. The proposed advice has been tailored for fishing vessel crews and is 
freely available in multiple languages. The guidelines are simple, and the materials required to safely release 
seabirds (i.e. towels/blanket, pliers, net, box/bin and gloves) are likely to be available on most longline 
vessels. New Zealand stated its hope that WCPFC could adopt the guidelines as a further step towards the 
protection of vulnerable seabirds affected by longline fishing.  
496. 
New Zealand further stated that CMM 2018-03 included the addition of hook-shielding devices to 
the list of acceptable measures to reduce seabird bycatch south of 30°S, and expanded the area to be covered 
by seabird mitigation measures from 30°S to 25°S with effect from 1 Jan 2020. It also noted that improved 
observer coverage is needed in key longline fleets in high latitude areas (both north and south) in order to 
obtain better estimates of seabird bycatch over time and over a wider geographic range, and that electronic 
monitoring will be helpful in this regard. Continued support for research on seabird bycatch mitigation 
methods in longline fisheries is needed, as well as attention to assessing compliance against the requirements 
of CMM 2018-03. 
497. 
Fiji, on behalf of FFA members stated that SC 15 noted that some seabirds are captured and released 
alive, with higher chances of survival when safe handling procedures are implemented. The implementation 
of effective seabird bycatch mitigation measures, safe handling and release of seabirds will help reduce the 
impact of pelagic longline and other hook fisheries bycatch on these vulnerable species. FFA members 
supported New Zealand’s proposal for the adoption of non-binding safe handling and release guidelines for 
seabirds, as well as the other seabird-related recommendations from SC15. FFA members also reminded 
CCMs that the revision of paragraph 1 of the CMM 2018-03 to include hook-shielding devices as a 
mitigation measure will come into effect on 1st January 2020.  
498. 
The EU supported the adoption of additional measures as proposed by New Zealand. New 
Caledonia, French Polynesia and RMI also voiced their full support.  
499. 
Indonesia supported the proposal and understands the importance of preserving the biodiversity of 
seabirds. It acknowledged the strong efforts of New Zealand and FFA members, and thanked ACAP for 
translating the guidelines into Bahasa Indonesia so these could be distributed. 
500. 
Korea thanked New Zealand, stating that it provided some suggestions to New Zealand to improve 
the guidelines, but that it understood that these come from ACAP originally, and that it could be difficult to 
reflect these suggestions in a short time period, while encouraging New Zealand and ACAP to work together 
in the coming years to make improvements based on their suggestions. Korea supported the proposal.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
85  
  
501. 
China also thanked New Zealand, stating it could support the guidelines. China noted that its 
industry found that branch line weighting reduced fishing efficiency by some 20%, while new hooks are too 
expensive. 
502. 
Chinese Taipei also supported the proposal.  
503. 
The representative of ACAP welcomed and supported the New Zealand proposal.  ACAP notedthat, 
following the welcome adoption of CMM 2018-03 in 2018 the challenge would be ensuring compliance 
with the measure, as discussed in WCPFC16-2019-OP08, and that compliance is at the heart of any 
mitigation. Mitigation measures have had a demonstrated impact in reducing seabird bycatch, meaning that 
the conservation crisis for albatrosses and petrels can be positively addressed. ACAP stated that it produces 
useful tools in the form of proactive advice and fact sheets, with translated versions available on its website; 
ACAP has prepared guidelines on the safe release of seabirds from hooks, and information relevant to 
injured birds. ACAP welcomed submission by delegations of suggestions for their next update. ACAP noted 
the financial support from the FAO Common Oceans project ACAP is also working on new entangled bird 
release guidelines, which would be useful for the purse seine fishery, and on an updated seabird ID guide. 
ACAP stated that it would celebrate the first World Albatross Day on 19 June 2020 and invited all countries 
to commemorate this occassion.  
504. 
The EU introduced, as presented in WCPFC16-2019-DP26 EU Proposal for two WCPFC16 
Decisions on Seabirds (rev 2), the following two recommendations from SC15 (Summary Report, paragraph 
581), and asked that the Commission consider these for adoption:  
i. 
WCPFC notes that, in view of analysing the effectiveness of night setting within the seabird bycatch 
mitigation measure, the Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) set time will need to be provided or 
obtainable from the WCPFC ROP longline data field.  
ii. WCPFC consider supporting the analysis of overlap between fishing effort distribution and species-
specific seabird distribution (as outlined in SP15-EB-WP-03) to both the WCPO Southern and 
Northern Hemispheres and to support an assessment of risk to populations resulting from fisheries- 
induced mortalities.  
 
505. 
The Commission adopted the Safe handling and release guidelines for seabirds as a Supplement 
to CMM 2018-04, Attachment N*). 
506. 
WCPFC16 noted that, in view of analysing the effectiveness of night setting within the seabird 
bycatch mitigation measure, the Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) set time will need to be provided or 
obtainable from the WCPFC ROP longline data field. 
507. 
WCPFC16 supported the analysis of overlap between fishing effort distribution and species-
specific seabird distribution (as outlined in SC15-EB-WP-03) to both the WCPO Southern and Northern 
Hemispheres and to support an assessment of risk to populations resulting from fisheries- induced 
mortalities.  
 
8.4 
Others 
8.4.1 
Proposal by FFA in WCPFC16-2019-DP02 for a CMM on Mobulid Rays  
508. 
Australia discussed changes to the proposal in WCPFC16-2019-DP02_Rev1, Proposal for a 
Conservation and Management Measure on Mobulid Rays caught in association with fisheries in the 
WCPFC Convention Area, which was first introduced under Agenda Item 4.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
86  
  
509. 
Japan thanked Australia, but expressed concern regarding the scientific basis for the paper, and 
specifically the reference to the listing by CITES, which Japan had opposed. Japan stated it wanted to see 
information from SC regarding the status of Mobulid rays.  
510. 
Tuvalu, on behalf of PNA members stated it supported the proposal and thanked FFA members for 
developing it and Australia for developing the revisions as proposed. FFA members stated that the proposed 
measure would protect those species that are extremely vulnerable to the effects of fishing and would require 
careful handling of any Mobulid rays that are taken unintentionally as bycatch. The proposed measure would 
also improve the information available on the status of Mobulid rays. PNA members strongly supported the 
proposal and looked forward to its adoption by WCPFC16. 
511. 
French Polynesia stated that it has a territory of 5 million km2, which is a sanctuary for all species 
of sharks and manta rays. As is true for many other Pacific islands cultures, manta rays have significant 
cultural importance. French Polynesia expressed its support for the FFA proposal aiming at increasing the 
consideration and protection of mobulid rays. 
512. 
New Caledonia stated that mobulids are protected species in its waters, and stated it shares the 
concern of FFA members regarding these species. It voiced its full support, and thanked FFA for providing 
Annex 1, regarding best handling practices. To facilitate training, New Caledonia suggested that SPC could 
provide training materials for fishermen on best practices. 
513. 
The EU, Korea, and Indonesia voiced support for the measure, with China supporting the measure 
if the CITES reference in the preambular was removed.  
514. 
Following further discussions between CCMs, and revisions by Australia, Japan stated that it would 
not block adoption of the measure, as it was supported by all other CCMs. However, Japan stated its concern 
regarding the lack of scientific justification for the proposed CMM, and that it believes that this type of 
CMM should be adopted based on a clear recommendation from the SC. Japan stated that it considers that 
adoption of the CMM did not prejudice Japan’s future position on any CMM.  
515. 
The Commission tasked the Scientific Services Provider with reviewing the data available via the 
Regional Observer Program and Scientific data to be provided to the Commission and identify any 
additional data requirements to undertake an assessment, either via traditional stock assessments or on 
the basis of quantitative risk assessments, ecological risk assessments, indicators assessment or other 
data-poor analytical techniques. Such information shall be considered by the Scientific Committee to 
advise the Commission on the feasibility and schedule for an assessment for mobulid rays. 
516. 
If the Scientific Committee advises that an assessment is feasible, and resources are made 
available, the Commission tasks the Scientific Services Provider to present, by 2023, an assessment of 
the status of mobulids to the Scientific Committee. 
517. 
The Commission adopted the Conservation and Management Measure on Mobulid Rays caught 
in association with fisheries in the WCPFC Convention Area (Conservation and Management Measure 
2019-05, Attachment O*).  
518. 
The Commission requests the Scientific Committee to recommend, whenever considered 
adequate based on evolving knowledge and scientific advice, further improvements to the handling 
practices detailed in Annex 1 of CMM 2019-05. 
 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
87  
  
8.4.2 
The proposal by Korea in DP15 for the protection of cetacean from purse seine 
fishing operations. 
519. 
CCMs discussed the proposal by Korea, first introduced under Agenda Item 4, and revised as 
WCPFC16-2019-DP15_rev2, Proposed Amendments to Conservation and Management Measure for 
Protection of Cetaceans from Purse Seine Fishing Operations (CMM 2011-03) - revision 2. CCMs were 
unable to reach consensus on adoption of the proposal. In particular, concerns were expressed by Japan 
regarding the lack of a scientific justification for the proposal. The United States proposed specific taskings 
for SC16 and SPC to progress work on cetacean bycatch while addressing the concerns raised by Japan. 
WWF, Pew and IOF stated they supported the recommendation by the United States and stated that in their 
view cetacean bycatch does need to be addressed. 
520. 
The Commission tasked the Scientific Committee in 2020 (SC16) to develop and recommend 
best handling practices for the release of cetaceans, taking into account existing standards or guidelines 
adopted in other fora, for consideration at WCPFC17. 
521. 
The Commission tasked the Scientific Services Provider to review available data to provide 
estimates of fishery interaction types and levels with cetaceans, without respect to particular flags, to the 
lowest possible taxonomic level, in the WCPF Convention Area, and to provide a report to the Scientific 
Committee for its review. 
 
AGENDA ITEM 9 — ADOPTION OF REPORTS FROM SUBSIDIARY BODIES  
522. 
The reports of the subsidiary bodies were taken by the Chair as read and were not presented to the 
Commission. However, recommendations of subsidiary bodies not addressed under other agenda items were 
considered under this agenda item. 
9.1 
SC15  
523. 
The Chair referred the Commission to WCPFC16-2019-SC15: SC15 Summary Report.  
524. 
The Commission noted the recommendations from SC15 set out in WCPFC16-2019-27 and 
adopted the SC15 Summary Report (WCPFC16-2019-SC15).  
 
9.2 
NC15 
525. 
The Chair referred the Commission to WCPFC16-2019-NC15: NC14 Summary Report. The NC 
Chair stated that NC16 would be held in Japan in early September, 2020. In addition, Japan will also host a 
joint NC and IATTC Working group meeting in late July 2020, with a CDS working group meeting held in 
conjunction.  
526. 
The Joint IATTC-WCPFC NC CDS WG Chair, Mr Shingo Ota, discussed their second meeting, 
held on 2 September 2019, and reviewed interest in development of an electronic CDS for Pacific bluefin 
tuna, which most participants favoured. It discussed various options for establishment of an electronic CDS 
(independently, building on the existing ICCAT CDS, or using the system developed by ICCAT). He 
suggested that the Commission may want to consider development of an electronic CDS for all tuna species, 
including tropical species, noting that although the IATTC-WCPFC NC CDS WG is scheduled to finish its 
work by the end of 2020, it could be advantageous to delay a decision, pursue further investigation, and 
report back to the Commission.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
88  
  
527. 
The Compliance Manager stated that the Secretariat’s understanding of the CDS development 
situation was that the WCPFC CDS Intersessional Working Group Chair had withdrawn over 1 year 
previously, and that the IWG was waiting for development of draft CDS standards to be developed by the 
FFA. 
528. 
The United States discussed it proposal, in WCPFC16-2019-DP11 Rules of Procedure relating to 
the Northern Committee, regarding a modification to the rules of procedure for the NC, which it stated 
reflected a problem faced by the NC in reaching quorum, which had occurred twice. The proposed change 
to the rule of procedures would enable NC to open and permit debate with a simple majority (rather than 
75% of members) present.  
529. 
Canada stated that as a member of NC, it found the situation challenging when a quorum was not 
achieved and encouraged the participation of all members. It supported the proposal by the USA. Chinese 
Taipei also supported the proposal. 
530. 
RMI inquired regarding the effect of the proposed rule change, and what would happen if a 
fragmented decision came back to the Commission. It inquired if this had been done before in other RFMOs. 
The United States stated that when quorum was not achieved at what was a regularly scheduled meeting, 
the NC chair would allow discussion to take place, with a subsequent meeting conducted on the margins of 
the Commission’s annual meeting, as occurred at WCPFC16. It noted that the Commission only received 
legitimate decisions from a quorum of the NC. RMI stated that the precedent that would be set was 
significant, and needed to be considered holistically, and inquired if rules for TCC should be changed to 
make it possible to hold meetings without a quorum? 
531. 
The EU stated that it understood that the proposal would simplify the NC’s work, but stated that 
this flexibility should not be used as a precedent and expressed the view that the rules governing the NC 
within the Commission were not fully satisfying, whereby decisions or recommendations could only be 
approved or rejected. It stated that it would like to be able to participate as a member of the NC and suggested 
that the way the NC functions should be modified. While suggesting these issues should be kept in mind, it 
stated that while the EU would not oppose the proposal, it sought greater transparency. 
532. 
FSM, on behalf of FFA members, stated that the same threshold for quorum should apply to all 
meetings of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies. To allow for a lower threshold for a quorum for NC 
was not agreeable to FFA members. FFA members suggested that the NC meeting could be held in 
conjunction with other WCPFC meetings, which would enable SIDS to participate more effectively.  
533. 
Vanuatu stated its opposition to the proposal.  
534. 
The Commission noted the subsequent discussions that occurred at WCPFC16 related to North 
Pacific Swordfish and Pacific Bluefin and adopted the report of NC15 (WCPFC16-2019-NC15).  
535. 
The Commission noted that Japan will host the next meeting of the Northern Committee – 
IATTC Working Group for Pacific Bluefin Tuna in late July 2020, and that this includes a one-day 
meeting of its Pacific Bluefin CDS Working Group.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
89  
9.3 
TCC15  
536. 
The Chair stated that the recommendations of TCC were highlighted in WCPFC16-2019-28, and 
noted the TCC15 Summary Report, WCPFC16-2019-TCC15. 

  
537. 
The United States confirmed it would provide a chair for the VMS IWG (proposed by TCC15) to 
address VMS data gaps and improve reliability of VMS reporting to the Commission.  
538. 
FSM on behalf of FFA members supported the TCC15 recommendation that WCPFC16 establish 
an IWG to develop specific recommendations to address VMS data gaps and improve the number of vessels 
reporting to the Commission VMS. It stated that VMS Non-Reporting to the Commission VMS has been a 
long-standing issue and is discussed at length at each TCC, where the persistence of vessels on the WCPFC 
RFV not reporting to the Commission VMS is noted. It appears that the problem is worsening. They 
reminded CCMs of Article 24(8) of the Convention, which obliges each CCM to require its fishing vessels 
to use MTUs that meet agreed WCPFC VMS Standards Specifications and Procedures (SSPs) while 
operating in areas covered by the Commission VMS within the Convention Area. FFA members supported 
the USA’s nomination to chair the IWG, and Australia as possible co-chair. 
539. 
Cook Islands on behalf of FFA members acknowledged the efforts by the TCC Vice-Chair to revise 
the workplan during the margins of TCC15 and following TCC15. They stated they were pleased to note 
that the draft workplan covers key work areas of priority to FFA members, including future work under the 
CMS, and that it takes into consideration the TCC workload beyond 1 year, but highlighted that 
implementation of the workplan would require adequate resourcing. 
540. 
Kiribati on behalf of FFA members referenced the report from the TCC WG on flow of observer 
reports and observer conduct (WCPFC15 Summary Report para 364). FFA members supported the TCC15 
outcome that agreed for continuation of the TCC WG’s efforts, stated their support for any work to 
strengthen the flow of observer reports for the purpose of supporting investigation by CCMs, including 
considerations of tracking observer report requests through the Commission’s Case File Management 
System as a way to improve transparency on the nature and timing of requests for observer reports from 
observer providers by flag State CCMs. However, they highlighted that FFA members would not support 
any amendments to the ROP Minimum Standards for observer reports that: dilute the authority of observer 
providers; impinge upon the ownership of data and information by coastal States with respect to fishing 
within EEZs; or discriminate or allow for unfair treatment of observers. 
541. 
WWF, IELP, TOF, IPLNF, SFP, and Pew submitted a joint intervention with respect to the TCC 
Summary Report, and also with regard to all subsidiary bodies of the Commission. They stated that at 
present, a lack of sufficient data that is typically generated through adequate observer coverage represents 
the single largest obstacle to establishing appropriate management measures. In fact, uncertainty and a lack 
of data is continually cited in the WCPFC process as a reason for inaction or delay. It is unquestionable that 
information collected as part of a successful observer programme is critically important to the proper 
conservation and management of our tuna fisheries. Data collected by observers plays a central role in 
informing fisheries scientists and managers on everything ranging from stock assessments to non-target 
species impacts as demonstrated by New Zealand's seabird proposal discussed earlier and the marine 
mammal proposal put forward by Korea. Furthermore, observers play an indispensable role in monitoring 
and documenting compliance with very important CMMs in the WCPO. Therefore, the WCPFC must 
consider securing full observer coverage in the longline fishery, whether through human observers or 
electronic monitoring, a top priority. All CCMs agreed to the WCPF Convention text and other Commission 
obligations to ensure the best scientific information or evidence available is used in WCPFC decisions. This 
obligation not only requires CCMs to actively seek out and use the best available scientific evidence, but 
also to ensure that measures generate the best available scientific evidence. WCPFC established CMM 2007-
01 which specifies that fisheries observer coverage is to be 5% of effort in each non-purse seine fishery. At 
that time low observer coverage in the longline fishery was identified as a significant conservation risk, with 
the arbitrary benchmark established at 5% considered a starting point for a stepwise progression toward full 
observer coverage. By failing to adopt a higher, scientifically and statistically valid level of observer 
coverage on longline vessels, the WCPFC has failed to meet the charge of the WCPF Convention to generate 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
90  
  
and use the best available scientific information. Therefore, the WCPFC must take action to improve 
observer coverage across all longline vessels operating in the WCPFC Convention Area. 
542. 
The Commission noted the recommendations from TCC15 set out in WCPFC16-2019-28. 
543. 
The Commission agreed to establish the VMS-Small Working Group (SWG) to address the VMS 
data gap and improve the number of vessels reporting to the Commission VMS for consideration by 
TCC16 (TCC Summary Report, paragraph 211). The Commission agreed that the SWG would be co-
chaired by the United States and Australia.  
544. 
The Commission noted that the update of the TCC Workplan would be progressed electronically 
during 2020. 
545. 
The Commission adopted the Summary Report of TCC15 (WCPFC16-2019-TCC15).  
 
9.4 
Intercessional Working Groups 
9.4.1 
Working Group to Review the Transhipment Measure (CMM 2009-06) 
546. 
The Commission noted the report on the progress by the IWG to Review the Transhipment 
Measure CMM 2009-06 (TS-IWG) from the Co-Chairs.  
547. 
The Commission agreed to the TS-IWG to continue its work in 2020. Following significant 
progress on its draft Scope of Work for the analysis of transhipment information, the TS-IWG will 
reconvene electronically in 2020. While the IWG was able to reach agreement on a considerable number 
of elements in the draft, there remain a few outstanding issues for which the IWG will need to consider 
and agree upon intersessionally. Moving forward, the TS-IWG Co-Chairs will welcome comments only 
on the outstanding proposed language in the draft Scope of Work by 13 January 2020. The Co-Chairs 
will circulate the updated Scope of Work following the conclusion of WCPFC16 and provide further 
instructions to the IWG by email.  
 
9.4.2 
ERandEM WG 
548. 
The ERandEM WG Chair (Australia) stated, that as noted under Agenda Item 4, the ERandEM WG 
responded to a tasking from TCC to revise the Electronic Monitoring concept paper and present it to 
WCPFC16. The ERandEM WG met at WCPFC16 as a SWG and had a very useful discussion on objectives 
and standards. There was interest from the working group in using the ROP objectives for EM work in the 
future, but an endorsement by the Commission of that objective will be needed at WCPFC16.  
549. 
Kiribati sought to clarify the focus of the objective, noting its understanding that the focus for EM 
is on data gaps, specifically with respect to longline fisheries and transhipment on the high sea.  
550. 
The ERandEM WG Chair recalled that the Commission had considered the priority areas a number 
of times, beginning through a consultancy in 2014. It highlighted the data gaps referenced by Kiribati. More 
recently Project 93 (involving the FFA, PNAO, SPC and WCPFC secretariats) confirmed the need to address 
the longline and transhipment data gaps. That focus is captured in both the concept paper, and the 
implementation schedule.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
91  
  
551. 
New Caledonia inquired regarding incentives for the use of Electronic Monitoring, and whether 
there is information available regarding onboard technical equipment and automatic treatment of video. The 
ERandEM WG Chair noted that incentives for the use of Electronic Monitoring will depend on national 
priorities in relation to data collection and needs. The Chair stated that there were a number of ways to 
incentivise the uptake of electronic monitoring systems by industry.  The Chair stated that Australia has 
implemented Electronic Monitoring across a number of fleets and fishing methods to support data collection 
and verification, and has seen some strong outcomes including much improved bycatch reporting, but noted 
that electronic monitoring systems were not the only solution to improving data collection.  
552. 
Kiribati reiterated that it was uncomfortable with the proposed language for the objective, stating 
that the focus should be on the identified data gaps. 
553. 
The ERandEM WG Chair noted the following principles that were raised during discussions in the 
margins of WCPFC16, in relation to progressing the implementation of Electronic Monitoring in the WCPO: 
▪ 
ensuring that the objectives remain broad to accommodate the priorities of CCMs as they develop their 
use of EM technology; 
▪ 
as noted at TCC15, taking into consideration the outcomes from Project 93 that describe areas where 
independent verification of data is low; 
▪ 
that EM technology in the WCPO should be used to target data gaps and uncertainties and as noted in 
Project 93 outcomes and recommended previously by TCC11 (and endorsed by WCPFC12) – the 
priority areas for implementation are longline and high seas transhipment activity; 
▪ 
that EM systems should be used to complement and supplement other data verification methods, such 
as observers; and 
▪ 
recognising the constraints and limitations of this technology as identified during trials. 
 
554. 
The Commission noted the intersessional progress by the Electronic Reporting and Electronic 
Monitoring Working Group on the development of draft Minimum Standards for Electronic Monitoring 
Programmes.  
555. 
The Commission endorsed the following objectives for electronic monitoring: “The objectives of 
the Commission Electronic Monitoring Programme (EMP) shall be to collect verified catch and effort 
data, other scientific data, and additional information related to the fishery from the Convention Area and 
to monitor the implementation of the conservation and management measures adopted by the 
Commission”.  
556. 
The Commission agreed that the conclusions from Project 93 in relation to data gaps be 
considered in the implementation of regional electronic monitoring standards. 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 10 — COMPLIANCE MONITORING SCHEME  
10.1 
Consideration and Adoption of the Final Compliance Monitoring Report (CMR)  
557. 
The Commission considered the provisional CMR recommended by TCC15 through a small 
working group led by Laurence Edwards (TCC Chair), which compiled the final CMR for adoption. The 
TCC Chair provided a report on the SWG outcomes.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
92  
  
558. 
Vanuatu responded to paragraph 19 of the final CMR by providing additional clarification on North 
Pacific albacore catch and effort by Vanuatu vessels in 2018, and stated that this information had been 
incorporated into the NC15 report submitted to WCPFC16 for adoption. Essentially, effort directed at North 
Pacific albacore has declined by 30%, and North Pacific albacore catch by 37%, since the 2002–2004 
reference period. This change was not clear from the data originally submitted to the NC. Vanuatu concurred 
with the view of Korea that the current text of CMM 2005-03 needs to be clarified.  
559. 
The Commission adopted the Final Compliance Monitoring Report for 2019 (WCPFC16-2019-
finalCMR, Attachment P*).  
 
10.2 
Review the workplan of tasks to enhance the Compliance Monitoring Scheme  
560. 
The Commission noted the recommendations from TCC15 and the progress on the workplan of 
tasks to enhance the Compliance Monitoring Scheme as set out in WCPFC16-2019-30.  
 
10.3 
Expiry of CMM 2018-07 at the end of 2019 
561. 
The TCC Vice-Chair presented the outcomes of the SWG to consider the Expiry of CMM 2018-07. 
 
562. 
The Commission adopted Conservation and Management Measure 2019-06, Attachment Q* 
which amends the Compliance Monitoring Scheme CMM (CMM 2018-07) and extends the Scheme for 
a further two years. 
563. 
The Commission agreed to establish a Compliance Monitoring Scheme (CMS) Intersessional 
Working Group under the leadership of the Vice-Chair of TCC, Dr Robert Day (Canada) which would 
work virtually to progress work intersessionally to undertake the CMS Future Work, including on audit 
points and the risk-based framework. 
 
564. 
FSM, on behalf of FFA members, stated they were the original proponents of the CMS CMM 
because FFA members take their responsibilities under the Convention seriously and recognise the 
importance of demonstrating accountability and transparency. They stated that implementation and 
enforcement of obligations, in accordance with our national laws, are essential in ensuring the long-term 
sustainability of our tuna resources. FFA members welcomed the Commission’s agreement to extend the 
CMS for two years and recognised the value of having a process in place that provides an appropriate level 
of scrutiny on CCMs. FFA members indicated their understanding that some CCMs sought a different 
outcome on certain aspects of the CMS, and appreciated the flexibility that was shown, noting that FFA 
members had also worked in good faith, and demonstrated flexibility, in achieving the outcome. FFA 
members highlighted their intention to ensure the focus of the CMS remains on systemic issues, to enable 
the Commission to continue to enhance its ability to meet the objectives of the Convention. They observed 
that the aggregated tables would ensure continuing access to relevant information and a structured process 
for following up on identified systemic issues, and suggested the revised measure would demonstrate that 
CCMs continue to effectively discharge their responsibilities. FFA members sought to clarify that the tables 
to be included in the provisional CMR (as per paragraph 37 of the CMM) are a summary of the para 26(ii) 
report for previous years, by obligation, not identified by CCM. FFA members agreed that it is important to 
have information on the public record to demonstrate the good progress that the Commission as a whole is 
making on compliance with its agreed obligations. They stressed their interest in maintaining a positive 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
93  
  
compliance culture in the WCPFC and hoped that the new CMM would enable the Commission to move 
forward with a more positive spirit. FFA members stated they would continue their efforts to improve the 
process through efforts to ensure the CMS is robust, effective, efficient and fair, and looked forward to 
working with other CCMs in this regard. 
565. 
The TCC Chair (RMI) acknowledged and thanked Dr Robert Day (CMS WG Chair and Vice Chair 
of TCC), the Compliance Manager, Secretariat staff and CCMs for producing a CMS CMM for the next two 
years. He noted that CCMs have endured many deliberations, challenges and debates over the CMS 
proposal, but welcomed the progress in renewing the CMS with a new process that will be focused on 
assessment at CCM level, which correlates to the Convention’s relevant Articles and moves away from past 
practices that have hampered TCC meetings in dealing with alleged infringements (case by case, day by 
day, night by night). He noted this would help provide assurance to the Secretariat and CCMs that 
compliance assessment would be effective, efficient, and fair.  
566. 
The EU expressed it congratulations to the CCMs that worked on and supported the measure. The 
EU stated that the impossibility to assess compliance at a vessel level risks to water down the compliance 
system in WCPFC. However, the EU could join the consensus to support the measure based on the 
reassurances made by the proponents indicating that assessments could still be taken at TCC when Flag 
States do not initiate any action following alleged infringements. The EU also stated that it looked forward 
to testing the new process over the forthcoming 2 years with a view to further improvements and hoped that 
a frank and open deliberation could be held at TCC16 in support of a good compliance outcome. 
567. 
New Zealand expressed appreciation to the chair of the SWG, all CCMs who cooperated, and Cook 
Islands for its efforts. New Zealand stated that its objective was a robust but streamlined system that focusses 
on compliance with the obligations which pose the greatest risk to the objectives of the Commission.  and 
noted its view that a risk-based assessment framework would be critical to the success of the other 
components of the CMS program. It looked forward to working with other members at TCC to enhance 
additional parts of the CMS. 
568. 
The United States expressed its satisfaction that WCPFC16 could agree on a revised CMS measure. 
It stated its hope that in the future the CMS measure could be adopted for longer periods, and that the 
approach would be robust, and would continue to allow WCPFC to have one of the best CMSs. It noted the 
need to focus on the ambitious TCC workplan, with almost no progress made in 2019. It thanked New 
Zealand for its work on risk-based assessment, which it hoped could soon be circulated to other members 
for review and looked forward to beginning work on audit points. 
569. 
IELP, The Ocean Foundation, Pew, IPNLF, and WWF commented regarding the CMS process 
generally and, more specifically, the draft guidelines for participation of observers in closed meetings that 
consider the compliance monitoring report stating that:  
i. 
They were pleased CCMs reached agreement on a new CMS because compliance is critical to the 
success of Commission members in achieving their conservation and management objectives, and 
were pleased that some of the information from the tables to be included in the CMR will be made 
public, which would assist civil society to help CCMs achieve compliance through technical, 
financial, and other assistance. They stated that more generally, transparency increases the legitimacy 
of decision making, and that stakeholders who are invested in, and rely on, the WCPFC fisheries, 
will be able to better understand how the fishery is being conducted and how decisions are being 
made.  
ii. They remained disappointed that CCMs were unable to reach agreement to allow observers to 
participate in discussions of the draft CMR, stating they had consistently strived to provide positive 
contributions to the work of the Commission and individual CCMs, and that excluding observers 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
94  
  
from CMR discussions was at odds with Article 21 of the Convention, as well as the conclusions of 
the Independent Review Panel, which found that excluding observers from CMR discussions was a 
major exception to the implementation of Article 21 on transparency. They noted that observers 
possess information and technical knowledge relevant to the compliance process, and their 
participation could help improve CMM implementation and lead to more targeted capacity assistance 
to address compliance-related gaps.  
iii. With respect to the draft guidelines on observer participation submitted by the United States, 
WCPFC16-2019-DP14, the observers noted their willingness to comply with guidelines and sign a 
confidentiality agreement in order to participate in Commission discussions regarding the CMR, but 
stated the rules must be clear, fair, and equitable, which DP14 did not achieve. They called attention 
to WCPFC16-2019-OP13, which they stated more effectively balances the concerns for 
confidentiality of CMS discussions with clear, fair, and equitable guidelines for observer 
participation. They looked forward to collaborating with CCMs to progress this work. 
 
570. 
On behalf of the Commission the Chair thanked Dr. Robert Day for his work on the CMS CMM. 
 
List of Obligations to be Reviewed by the Compliance Monitoring Scheme in 2020 
567. 
The Vice-Chair presented the outcomes of the SWG to develop the list of obligations to be reviewed 
by the Compliance Monitoring Scheme in 2020.  
571. 
 The Commission agreed to the List of Obligations to be reviewed by the Compliance Monitoring 
Scheme in 2020, covering 2019 activities (Attachment R*). 
572. 
The Commission noted that this is the third time the list of obligations is being rolled over and 
tasked the TCC16 to recommend a proposed list of obligations to be assessed in 2021 (covering 2020 
activities) for consideration by WCPFC17 in 2020.  
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 11 — ADOPTION OF THE 2020 IUU VESSEL LIST  
573. 
 The Chair introduced WCPFC16-2019-31: WCPFC IUU Vessel List for 2020, which presented for 
the consideration of WCPFC16 the relevant information for a decision on the 2020 WCPFC IUU Vessel 
List.  
574. 
The Commission agreed to maintain the three vessels currently on the WCPFC IUU Vessel List 
and adopted the 2020 WCPFC IUU Vessel List (Attachment S*).  
575. 
The Commission approved the TCC15 recommendations that the Executive Director request 
information about the vessels on the WCPFC IUU Vessel List and to promptly advise CCMs. 
 
576. 
The Chair advised the meeting that the EU submitted proposal WCPFC16-2019-DP08 Proposal 
for Amending CMM 2010-06 to provide for cross-listing of IUU vessels among RFMOs and measures 
concerning the involvement of nationals in IUU fishing. In addition, the Chair also reminded actions to be 
taken to capture the name and nationality of the master and beneficial owners of IUU vessels; cross listing 
and the name and nationality of the master and beneficial owners were also addressed through 
recommendations from TCC15.   
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
95  
  
577. 
Australia stated its resolute commitment to combatting IUU, both in the Pacific and across the globe, 
and that its strong partnership with its regional neighbours is demonstrated by ongoing engagement and 
cooperation, through the FFA, to secure fisheries resources within the Pacific region. It stated that Australia 
actively collaborates with FFA members and seeks to enhance participation in cooperative activities in the 
Pacific by sharing resources, exchanging information and maximising the effectiveness of monitoring, 
control and surveillance tools; Australia also has a proven record of taking action to secure regional fisheries 
resources, including through their contribution to regional surveillance such as Operation Nasse, as reported 
on to TCC15. It has long recognised the value of cooperating regionally and extended its sincere thanks to 
France, New Zealand and the United States for ongoing cooperative activity in the Pacific. Australia stated 
that it is continuing its long-term investment in the Asia-Pacific region and has committed to a new 30-year 
programme providing boats and aerial surveillance to help deter illegal fishing. It is also conducting regional 
maritime surveillance and enforcement capacity building activities, which contribute to the ability of CCMs 
to ensure the safety and security of their maritime zones. Australia observed that IUU fishing continues to 
threaten the sustainability of the ocean and the economies that depend on it, it compromises opportunities 
for legitimate fishers, and undermines the rules-based order designed to ensure cooperation in the 
management of fish stocks and the disruption of IUU business models. Australia stated it was pleased that 
the level of illegal fishing in the Pacific remained relatively low, which signals that CCMs’ collective 
interventions are working, but that careful attention and scrutiny on issue remained the best insurance. 
Australia urged all CCMs to continue their efforts as coastal, market, and port States and States with 
nationals engaging in IUU fishing to do everything within their power to combat IUU fishing.  
578. 
Japan addressed the proposal that the Secretariat indicate the master’s name and nationality on the 
IUU vessel, stating its view that procedurally there was a need to amend CMM 2010-06.  
579. 
RMI addressed the three vessels that had been on the IUU list for many years, during which time 
the Commission had been unable to take any effective action, and suggested that until the Commission could 
reduce the existing IUU vessel list, it should not make the list longer by adding vessels from other RFMOs. 
580. 
Tonga stated on behalf of FFA members that, as recommended by TCC15, the master’s name and 
nationality should be included in the WCPFC IUU List, so that rogue persons involved in IUU fishing could 
be tracked. They recalled that WCPFC13 agreed that “where the vessel is not listed on the Record of Fishing 
Vessels and the master’s name and nationality are not known, the flag State is responsible for providing the 
name and nationality of the master, so that these details can be included into the WCPFC IUU Vessel List”, 
and request that the Executive Director ensure that master’s name and nationality are captured for any future 
listings on the WCPFC IUU Vessel List. 
581. 
Japan stated that it appreciated efforts to revise the IUU CMM. Regarding the comment from RMI, 
it observed that the frustrations are understandable, and that many RFMOs have a long list of IUU vessels, 
and that most of the vessels had probably changed their name, flag, etc. Japan stated that one way to address 
this would be through the use of the IMO number, because that cannot be changed. Most vessels are now 
required to obtain IMO numbers, and hopefully this could help solve the issue. Japan stated it was not sure 
if the RFMOs should keep long lists of vessel names on IUU lists, but suggested that for now it was perhaps 
the best approach, while considering a cut-off, such as deleting vessels after 10 years, as otherwise the list 
would expand and become less useful. 
582. 
The EU stated that all CCMs were engaged in the fight against IUU, and stressed the need to proceed 
step by step, to reinforce the means contributing to reduce IUU fishing,. It stated that fundamentally the 
Commission should recognize vessels from other RFMOs, when they have already been identified elsewhere 
as IUU. The EU stressed the need for a comprehensive approach, as IUU fishing would continue, and could 
be reduced only through common effort. It noted that the proposal provided more instruments to fight IUU 
fishing.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
96  
  
583. 
Fiji, on behalf of FFA members, stated that since TCC14 FFA members had broadened their 
approach to combating IUU fishing, from a heavily vessel-focused approach to include greater scrutiny and 
profiling of individuals and companies involved in IUU fishing. That approach was fully endorsed by the 
fisheries ministers of FFA members and involves the inclusion of information on the beneficial ownership 
of a vessel in the WCPFC IUU listing process, in particular for any new listings. FFA members proposed 
that any person with at least 25% equity interest in a vessel, whether directly or indirectly, should be 
considered a beneficial owner. The flag State of the vessel is primarily responsible for providing information 
on beneficial ownership. FFA members sought the views of other CCMs. 
584. 
RMI suggested that the proposal be re-examined by TCC in order to develop a better option in the 
interest of achieving an IUU-free Pacific, noting that cross listing had to be examined in relation to the 
practicality of implementing CMM 2010-06 and its obligations. 
585. 
New Caledonia stated that all CCMs were concerned about IUU, especially Pacific coastal states, 
and termed IUU fishing a poison for WCPFC fishing, one that directly affects resource sustainability and 
profitability. It supported any action that can help reduce IUU fishing. 
586. 
Canada supported cross-listing of IUU vessels, and stated it listened with interest to the FFA 
statement regarding beneficial owners. The WCPFC added 0 vessels over the prior 10 years, while other 
RFMOs have added IUU vessels, which are apparently operating in those areas. Canada inquired if those 
IUU vessels were possibly fishing in the WCPO? It encouraged using the available tools that were not very 
costly and could help identify vessels as they come into WCPO waters to fish and visit ports. Canada stressed 
it should be a straightforward issue, which could be but should not have to be deferred. 
587. 
The EU stated that not supporting cross-listing was a good way to obstruct the fight on IUU fishing, 
noting that the issue had been fully discussed and supported at TCC and other RFMOs. The EU rejected the 
suggestion that CCMs could not implement and take into account a larger IUU vessel list, stating that a 
longer list would simply enable a CCM to refuse port entry or further inspect vessels on the list, which 
would not entail a burden, more than the obligations that port States have to fight IUU fishing. The EU 
acknowledged there would be additional work for the Secretariat, but stated it had worked with the 
Secretariat in formulating revisions to DP08, and that are presented in DP08_rev1 that aim to facilitate the 
cross-listing processes. It stated that the arguments being raised were not good ones to justify not to support 
the proposal. 
588. 
French Polynesia shared the concerns raised about IUU fishing and supported adoption of the 
proposals at WCPFC16. 
589. 
PNG supported the FFA comments in terms of inclusion of new processes to address IUU through 
listing of beneficial owners and persons of interest, while supporting the views of RMI that alternatives 
should be found to simply continuing to list IUU vessels.  
590. 
China stated it is a member of both IATTC and IOTC, and both adopted IUU cross-listing in 2018, 
which created legal issues for China, and stated that it could only agree to cross listing on a case-by-case 
basis for organisations of which China is a member.  
591. 
Australia, on behalf of FFA members, stated that they had taken several opportunities to discuss the 
proposal by the EU regarding cross-listing, but that the EU has not yet responded to the queries that they 
had raised earlier in the session. They further stated that they supported the principle of IUU vessel cross-
listing but needed further time to consider the issue of administrative burden for the Secretariat and national 
administrations, as well as problems identified in other RFMOs. Australia stated that the FFA also needed 
time to consider the underlying process to ensure WCPFC’s listing procedures remained robust. It expressed 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
97  
  
concern that the information that led to the original listing by another RFMO would not be readily available 
to TCC without the agreement of those RFMOs. Australia also stated that the CMM 2013-06 assessment of 
the EU’s proposal did not meet FFA members’ expectations. and needed further work. It suggested that the 
critical questions be considered by TCC, along with a revised and improved 2013-06 assessment to 
accompany any new proposal. It stated it would keep working with the EU to this end.  
592. 
Japan stated it recognized the position of FFA members, but encouraged them to consider that other 
RFMOs might consider that there was a lack of reciprocity and cooperation on the part of WCPFC, given 
that other RFMOs will incorporate the IUU vessel list from WCPFC, but WCPFC won’t incorporate their 
lists. Japan suggested that if the Commission receives a list from other RFMOs, it should be posted on the 
Commission’s webpage and CCMs could think about how to use this. 
593. 
Korea thanked the EU for its efforts to combat IUU activities, and stated that it supported the 
sentiments expressed in the proposal, but had some concerns about the process, especially the delisting 
process.  
594. 
The Chair observed that despite extensive discussion, the Commission could not reach agreement 
on IUU vessel cross-listing.  
595. 
Australia, in closing reiterated its position that the issue should be discussed at TCC. It suggested 
working through implementation of the proposal with the EU, including to assist in the development of an 
accurate and comprehensive CMM 2013-06 assessment, with a view to revisiting the cross-listing issue at 
WCPFC17. RMI supported the comment by Australia but sought a recommendation that TCC focus first on 
ways to address WCPFC’s IUU vessel list before taking on the IUU vessel lists of other RFMOs. 
596. 
 The EU expressed its disappointment, noting that the cross-listing procedure recommendation was 
made by TCC, and that the procedure is already used by other RFMOs, and that some CCMs who supported 
it in those other RFMOs did not support it at WCPFC. The EU proposed that the Commission task the 
Secretariat to stay in contact with other RFMOs and include on its website the list of other RFMOs’ IUU 
Vessel lists.  
597. 
The Commission approved the TCC15 recommendations that the Executive Director ensure that 
details on name and nationality of master and beneficial owners are captured for any future listings on 
the WCPFC IUU Vessel List.  
598. 
The Commission adopted Conservation and Management Measure 2019-07, Attachment T* 
which amends CMM 2010-06, to include “master of the vessel at the time of the IUU fishing activities, 
and the nationality(ies) of that master” as a new subparagraph in paragraph 19.  
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 12 — REPORT OF THE THIRTEENTH ANNUAL SESSION OF THE 
FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION COMMITTEE 
12.1 
Report of the Thirteenth Finance and Administration Committee  
599. 
FAC Co-Chair Camille Movick-Inatio (FSM) reported the key highlights and recommendations 
from FAC 13 and referenced the comprehensive summary report (WCPFC16-2019-FAC13-11). She 
thanked all CCMs who participated in FAC13, which met four times. The recommendations from FAC 13 
included that the Commission adopt the audited financial statements for 2018 and adopt proposed 
amendments to the Regulations pertaining to the Special Requirements Fund.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
98  
  
600. 
The Chair thanked the FAC Chair for her leadership.  
601. 
Japan noted that it had extended the deadline for the Japan Trust Fund to the end of January 2020. 
Palau thanked Japan for its flexibility.  
602. 
Australia stated it would accept the FAC’s recommendations and acknowledged the work of the 
Secretariat and the FAC Chair. 
603. 
Kiribati inquired whether, in light of its difficulty in meeting its annual contribution with annual 
increases, the offset of the annual assessed contributions could be increased. The United States stated its 
view that given the modest increase in contributions this was possible, although it preferred that this be done 
in the FAC and recommended to the Commission.  
604. 
RMI and the EU supported the proposed budget.  
605. 
Regarding the tri-annual salary review, Canada noted that the staff rules require it be conducted 
every 3 years. Canada stated its conclusions were ignored by the FAC; the study cost $20,000, which would 
have paid for 33% (1 year) of the increase. Canada reminded CCMs that the WCPFC Executive Director 
receives a cost of living allowance adjustment, but staff do not. 
12.2 
Budget Approval for 2020 and Indicative Budgets for 2021 and 2022  
606. 
The Commission adopted the report of the Thirteenth Session of the FAC (WCPFC16-2019-
FAC13), including the 2020 budget of $ 8,118,261 and indicative budgets for 2021 and 2022 of 
$8,074,268 and $ 8,087,288 respectively (Attachments U*).  
607. 
The Commission adopted the FAC13 recommendation to amend the Financial Regulations to add 
a new sub-paragraph 7.8 as follows:  
“REGULATION 7 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FUND  
7.8: For the purposes of supporting attendance by Chairs of SC, TCC, FAC Co- Chair and the 
WCPFC Vice Chair from Small Island Developing States to the Annual Session, Financial 
Regulation 7.5 and 7.7 on the application process and reporting requirements, respectively, 
shall be waived.”  
608. 
The Commission agreed to offset the annual assessed contributions by an additional USD50,000 
from the CNM Fund.  
609. 
The final adopted 2020 budget and Annexes are provided in (Attachment V*).  
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 13 — ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS  
13.1 
Secretariat’s Corporate Plan  
610. 
The Executive Director introduced WCPFC16-2019-32: Draft WCPFC Secretariat Corporate 
Plan. He explained that the Commission agreed in 2015 to a two tier planning framework. Such a framework 
was developed through a process of broad consultation and a dedicated workshop and reviewed by the 
Commission in 2016. The Commission in 2017 did not support a long-term strategic plan, and instructions 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
99  
  
were given to develop a mid-term corporate plan. In 2018 the Commission was not able to agree to the draft 
mid-term corporate plan that was presented. The new instructions from WCPFC15 were to develop a 
corporate plan, (as presented in WCPFC16-2019-32) to guide the Secretariat’s work. The Executive 
Director stated he was mindful of the Convention’s mandate for the Secretariat when developing the plan; 
Article 15(4) of the Convention stipulates the functions of the Secretariat, and he noted that all tasks outlined 
in the plan are consistent with that mandate. Other guiding principles were that the plan be simple, user-
friendly, readily understood, with realistic and achievable targets, and regularly updated (i.e., a living 
document). Furthermore, it must enable the Secretariat to be strategically organised and managed; 
adequately resourced; and serve to make the Secretariat more transparent and accountable. The Executive 
Director reviewed the plan’s organisation and structure, with a mission (to provide efficient and effective 
secretariat services to enable the WCPFC to fulfil its key mandate), which is supported by goals and 
underlying objectives. The operational part of the plan comprises activities (with specific actions, and 
operational plans) and indicators (desired outputs and deliverables), with the latter guiding assessment of 
the Secretariat’s performance. The plan is intended to be regularly reviewed (updated annually), with the 
Executive Director annual reporting on the performance of the plan. He noted that the entire Secretariat was 
consulted in the drafting of the plan. 
611. 
The EU thanked the Executive Director for the work done and stated that the plan was a useful 
document. It observed that the plan was more of a reference document rather than one that should be adopted 
and provided several specific suggestions. 
612. 
Cook Islands on behalf of FFA members thanked the Executive Director and the Secretariat for 
producing the document, which they stated clarifies the role of the Secretariat, and includes important 
tasking with timelines. FFA members stated they were happy to adopt it, and approved of the Secretariat’s 
proposal on annual reporting and review of the Corporate Plan. They suggested that this was an appropriate 
task for the FAC to assess the Plan at their next meeting in 2020 and provide an update to the Commission 
on the implementation and monitoring of the Plan. 
613. 
The Chair noted that the plan was a living document and encouraged CCMs to provide feedback to 
the Secretariat. 
614. 
The Commission noted the medium-term WCPFC Secretariat Corporate Plan 2020-2023 as a 
living document to guide the work of the Secretariat and agreed for the Secretariat to proceed to finalise 
it as an internal planning document (WCPFC16-2019-32).  
 
13.2 
Research projects 
13.2.1 ABNJ Project  
615. 
Janne Fogelgren (FAO) introduced WCPFC16-2019-33, Report to WCPFC on Progress of the 
Project Sustainable Management of Tuna Fisheries and Biodiversity Conservation in the ABNJ. He noted 
six years of work had gone into the Common Oceans Tuna Project, and it was time to assess the results of 
the partnership of over 20 actors including states; RFMOs, and other intergovernmental arrangements; 
NGOs; private sector and academia working to advance the sustainability of tuna fisheries globally. An 
ongoing project terminal evaluation found some outcomes were outstanding and contributed significantly 
to the Project’s goals; many resulted from activities conducted by partners in the Pacific. He cited support 
work for the development of MSEs, a pilot on EM systems for compliance in Fiji, certification-based courses 
for compliance officers coordinated by the FFA, the shark and bycatch mitigation work through WCPFC 
and SPC, and work on biodegradable FADs with ISSF. He invited CCMs to consult the project website for 
full information on achievements. The successes prompted interest by partners to propose a new set of 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
100  
  
activities for a second phase of the Project that would involve projects on deep-sea fisheries as well as cross-
sectoral activities in the high seas. Although it was expected GEF funding would be reduced in Phase II, he 
stated that the strong partnerships developed during the first phase  involving all the tuna RFMOs, several 
NGOs, the private sector and other actors  would serve to generate funding from additional donors. FAO 
received close to 60 proposals for Phase II activities from various partners and was working to prioritize 
these. Themes include (i) follow-up activities from Phase I, to reinforce their impact, such as MSE, various 
compliance support activities, capacity building on various subjects (governance and compliance), 
continuation on the mitigation of bycatch issues; plus (ii) new areas of potential interest such as innovative 
financing mechanisms related to sustainable/blue economy activities, data limited assessments, and climate 
change. An initial proposal for the Program, including a concept note for the Tuna Project, will be presented 
to the partners at the last Program and Project Steering Committees at the end of January 2020. The Program 
proposal is expected to then be finalized and submitted for consideration by the GEF Council by June 2020. 
If endorsed, FAO and the partners will work together to develop a fully-fledged project document within 12 
months. He invited the Pacific partners to continue to explore jointly better ways to ensure sustainable 
management of tuna fisheries, maximizing the benefits for the participating communities.  
616. 
Nauru, on behalf of FFA members thanked the ABNJ Tuna Project for significantly increasing 
WCPFC’s understanding of the bycatch components of WCPO tuna fisheries. The project has also provided 
significant support to some FFA members to advance trials on EM that have been instrumental in making 
progress on EM in the region. FFA members supported the development of proposals for a second phase of 
the ABNJ Tuna Project and sought clarification on the timing of the process as its membership seeks to be 
more involved with the development of these proposals. ABNJ stated that by the final Project Steering 
Committee meeting in January 2020, a draft concept note would be submitted to the GEF council; assuming 
approved then the project document would be developed over 12–25 months, with the second phase 
beginning in early 2022.  
617. 
The EU affirmed its appreciation for the contributions of the first ABNJ project and supported 
further collaboration between the Secretariat and Phase II of the ABNJ. 
618. 
Tonga thanked the ABNJ Project for increasing its understanding of bycatch, including of sharks; 
it noted that there were complaints from fishermen of the impact of sharks on fisheries, because of the 
economic losses, and inquired whether the Commission could examine this, including determining and 
monitoring the species of sharks, and better understanding the ecology of sharks and their interaction with 
tuna. The intervention was supported by Niue, which stated it faces the same issues. 
619. 
The Chair thanked FAO for their contribution through the ABNJ project. 
620. 
The Commission noted the updates on Progress of the Project on Sustainable Management of 
Tuna Fisheries and Biodiversity Conservation in areas beyond national jurisdictions and the fact that the 
project is ending at the end of 2019 (WCPFC16-2019-33). The Commission was also informed on 
arrangements for a potential second phase to the project. 
 
13.2.2 Pacific Tuna Tagging Project  
621. 
Dr Graham Pilling (SPC) introduced WCPFC16-2019-34: Pacific Tuna Tagging Project steering 
committee, which reports on the Pacific Tuna Tagging Project (PTTP) steering committee meeting held on 
the margins of SC15 in Pohnpei, FSM in August 2019. PTTP is a joint research project aimed at obtaining 
data to contribute to and reduce uncertainty in stock assessments of skipjack, bigeye and yellowfin tuna, and 
improve understanding of interactions between stocks and gears to inform management options. Dr Pilling 
thanked all CCMs and partners that have contributed to the programme, which currently include PNG, the 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
101  
  
Republic of Korea, Australia, the EU, New Zealand, the WCPFC and ISSF, as well as long-standing partners 
throughout the region that facilitate and support the work and access to EEZs and fishing grounds. The 
meeting at SC15 focussed on the 13th central Pacific cruise, which took place in 2018, lasted for 39 days, 
and focussed on data collection for studies on tuna movements, exploitation rates and FAD association 
dynamics. During the cruise, almost 1,150 tags were deployed, ranging from conventional to archival and 
sonic tags. SC15 noted the need for continued CCM participation and support in tag reporting, and the work 
to reinstate tag recovery officers in key locations and tagging cruise awareness raising efforts. Activities 
‘marking’ otoliths in fish through strontium chloride injection, with the aim of improving understanding of 
tuna growth through validation of ageing estimates, was noted and encouraged. This work relies on the 
support of CCMs to collect samples and measurements from the recaptured fish. SC15 supported the 2020 
tagging programme and budget, along with the 2021–2022 programmes and indicative budgets, and the 
PTTP workplan in general. 
622. 
Vanuatu, on behalf of FFA members noted the report of ongoing progress and success in 
implementation of the PTTP, and the importance of effective tag seeding to estimating reporting rates and 
supported increased deployment and fleet coverage of tag seeding experiments. FFA members encouraged 
continued member participation and support in tag reporting.  
623. 
Korea acknowledged the successful accomplishments of the PTTP thus far, including data on 
specific movements and behavioural issues, and stated that Korea would continue to provide financial 
support.  
624. 
 The Commission noted the updates on the Pacific Tuna Tagging Project (WCPFC16-2019-34). 
 
13.2.3 WCPFC Tissue Bank  
625. 
Dr Graham Pilling (SPC) introduced WCPFC15-2018-35: Report of the Tuna Tissue Bank steering 
committee, which reports on the steering committee meeting held on the margins of SC15 in Pohnpei, FSM 
in August. WCPFC established its tissue bank so that national and international fisheries research institutes 
could access the collections to undertake necessary research to enhance understanding of the dynamics of 
tuna and related species in the WCPFC region and also of ecosystem dynamics. As an example it has proved 
pivotal in the recent work on tuna growth that has had significant positive impacts on the stock assessments. 
SC15 noted the biological samples collected over the past year, with almost 2,700 samples collected from 
600 fish, including the key tuna species, billfish and ‘bycatch’ species. However, declines in the rate of 
sample collection were noted and plans have been developed to reinvigorate sampling in the coming years, 
such as reward programmes. SC15 tasked the SC to develop initiatives to improve the situation. Other issues 
noted include the need to improve sample collection and storage processes to maximise the potential for 
these samples to be used in future genetic analyses, a key area of work planned for the coming years. SC15 
endorsed the work plan for the coming year as detailed in WCPFC15-2018-35, and associated budgets, 
both 2020 and indicative for 2021–2022, as reflected in the SC budget request. 
626. 
Solomon Islands, on behalf of FFA members, supported the continuation of the Tuna Tissue Bank 
program, and emphasised the importance of the project, which provides valuable data in a number of 
different areas for the work of the Commission. 
627. 
The EU stated it was delighted to see that the project, initiated by a voluntary contribution from the 
EU, had become a key component of the Commission’s scientific work, and supported its continuation. 
628. 
Indonesia acknowledged the important work being done and inquired about future close kin 
analysis; maintenance of the tissue bank and what that entailed; and work done to collect tissue from other 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
102  
  
areas. SPC stated that close kin analysis is used in PBFT for estimating stock size, and that a project 
(workshop) is proposed to do this. SPC is also considering whether close kin may be most appropriate with 
respect to management measures for sharks. SPC stated the tissue bank would be involved, but it was first 
important to determine the value of the research for these applications. The tissue bank has two locations 
Noumea and Brisbane (through CSIRO). A website provides information on available samples. Samples are 
obtained from SPC’s own sampling, the wider WCPFC tissue bank, and other programs as well.  
629. 
The Commission noted the updates on Project 35b: WCPFC Tuna Tissue Bank (WCPFC16-
2019-35). 
 
13.2.4 WPEA Project  
630. 
Dr SungKwon Soh (WCPFC Science Manager) introduced WCPFC16-2019-36: Update on WPEA 
Project. The third phase of the Western Pacific East Asia (WPEA) project (the Western Pacific East Asia 
Improved Tuna Monitoring Activity) funded by New Zealand for 5 years, is now being implemented, and 
scheduled for completion in 2022. WPEA has a new project manager (Alice McDonald). Key features of 
the WPEA-ITM Project include: expansion of the capacity of enumerators in collecting catch data from port 
sampling; building the capacity and sustainability of fisheries observer programs; supporting national policy 
and legal review to improve tuna fisheries monitoring and governance; and improving the capacity of 
national fishery staff in data management and analysis. The three countries (Indonesia, Philippines, and 
Vietnam) continued to collect tuna catch data at tuna landing sites throughout 2019, which is the core part 
of the WPEA project. A number of workshops (Annual Data Review, Annual Total Tuna Catch Estimates, 
and Observer Training) were convened in 2019, and assisted by Peter Williams (SPC-OFP), produced 
national annual total tuna catch estimates by species and by gear. In 2018, the annual total tuna catch by 
species in the three countries was around 868,000 mt, which is about 32% of the WCPFC Convention Area 
catch of 2,716,396 mt in 2018. 
631. 
New Zealand welcomed the new WPEA project manager and thanked the three countries for their 
engagement. 
632. 
PNG, on behalf of FFA members, noted the progress of this project and its critical importance for 
addressing data gaps and improving information on tuna catch and fishing effort in Indonesia, Philippines 
and Vietnam. They encouraged the countries to engage actively in the project and expressed gratitude to 
New Zealand for funding the continuation of the project. They asked how this project would be continued 
after the current end date to ensure the data continues to be collected and provided for the use of the 
Commission. 
633. 
The Science Manager stated that the project first began in 2005 in the Philippines, and 2007 in 
Indonesia. Two phases (7 years) were funded by GEF, during which time the Philippines fully took over the 
responsibility of supporting its enumerators and data collection. Indonesia plans to take over data collection 
aspects in the near future. Vietnam’s research institute is working to allocate funding to support data 
collection. He noted that the project has several years to go, and the countries are increasing their 
responsibilities.  
634. 
Indonesia acknowledged the support from New Zealand for the WPEA – ITM Project, stating that 
increasing its capacity (for data collection and management of tuna fisheries) was a lengthy process. It stated 
that a significant output was the ability to conduct data collection for stock assessment and harvest strategy. 
Indonesia is in the process of developing a harvest strategy for tuna in its archipelagic waters and repeated 
its expectation that this work would be linked with the harvest strategy work in the WCPFC. It stated that 
the work involved the government and related stakeholders through data collection and appropriate fisheries 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
103  
  
management activities. Indonesia also acknowledged support from Australia through ACIAR in collection 
of biological data in its archipelagic waters relating to stocks in the Pacific and Indian Oceans. It stated that 
there were many challenges, as Indonesia has one of the most complex tuna fisheries in the world, with most 
of the catch from small scale fisheries managed by both central and local governments. Currently 60%–70% 
of the data collection budget is covered by the various stakeholders in Indonesia; further reports on progress 
will be delivered to SC16, TCC16 and WCPFC17. 
635. 
The Philippines acknowledged the assistance provided by the Commission under the project, 
especially for data collection and looked forward to continuing the work under the project. It noted that the 
Philippines provides 100% financial support for its data collection.  
636. 
The Commission noted the updates on the WPEA Project (WCPFC16-2019-36). 
 
  
 
13.2.A Others  
  
  
 
13.2.A.1  Japan’s proposal to compare high seas VMS data with AIS data  
 
 
 
 
637. 
Japan’s proposal (in WCPFC16-2019-DP17) was introduced under Agenda Item 4. 
638. 
CCMs generally supported the proposed project. However, several CCMs expressed concerns 
regarding the use of VMS data differentiated by flag. The EU noted that it has only 2 vessels in the 
Convention Area and was concerned these could be identified. China stated that its regulations and 
associated legal issues would preclude the use of China’s VMS data for the project. Chinese Taipei requested 
that advice on the project be obtained from Scientific Committee.  It also stated its understanding that VMS 
data was treated as non-public domain data, and was only for the use of the Commission, and requested its 
data not be used even if the project had acquired scientific advice and some CCMs agreed to provide their 
VMS data. The United States raised the need for consistency in terms of what data is provided by various 
CCMs.  
639. 
Despite general support for the proposal, Japan withdrew its proposal with the aim to conduct 
further consultations and presenting the proposal for consideration by the Scientific Committee before re-
tabling it to the Commission. 
 
  
 
13.2.A.2  MOU with SPRFMO (WCPFC16-2019-37) 
 
640. 
The Commission’s Legal Adviser addressed the draft MOU between WCPFC and SPRFMO, noting 
that Article 22 of the Convention provides for suitable arrangements to be made with eligible government 
organisations. WCPFC has MOUs with other RFMOs. SPRFMO covers same geographic area as WCPFC, 
and the two Secretariats have discussed a draft MOU between them. A draft was circulated for comments, 
and revisions are reflected in WCPFC16-2019-37. She noted the MOU is not binding; it was suggested to 
be in operation for 3 years, with a provision for extension. If approved, the MOU would be forwarded to 
SPRFMO for their consideration at their meeting in January 2020. If need be it would be returned with their 
comments and again circulated to CCMs for their advice.  
641. 
FSM on behalf of FFA members stated they were generally quite supportive of the MOU, but had 
some concerns about the scope of the information and data sharing provisions. The protection of confidential 
information and data that is provided to the Commission is critical. They sought clarity on whether such 
information and data would be shared under the MOU and emphasised the need for effective confidentiality 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
104  
  
and non-disclosure provisions. The Legal Adviser stated that any data sharing would need to be consistent 
with the WCPFC Data sharing requirements. The Secretariat would ensure that all requirements were met, 
and consultations would be held with CCMs if needed. She stated that the Secretariat did not anticipate that 
significant data sharing would take place, but some (such as regarding IUU fishing and the ROFV) could be 
anticipated. 
642. 
The EU supported the process and noted that the text was very comprehensive. It inquired whether 
the draft had also been discussed by SPRFMO. The Legal Adviser stated that an earlier draft had been 
discussed by SPRFMO; the document in WCPFC16-2019-37 reflects those consultations.  
643. 
Japan stated it was not a member of SPRFMO and voiced the need to be cautious about data 
exchanges, which it stated should be subject to data rules. It also inquired regarding the degree of data 
confidentiality in SPRFMO and suggested that if SPRFMO’s data confidentiality rules were weaker than 
those of WCPFC, and WCPFC provided non-public domain data, it could be at risk of leaking to the public. 
The Legal Adviser stated that if the Commission requested that the Secretariat ensure reciprocity in sharing 
non-public data, this would have to be taken into account; additionally, there could be an undertaking that 
if data was shared the WCPFC rules would apply to that data, meaning confidential data would remain 
confidential. She stated that those issues could be handled through a decision by the Commission. 
644. 
Japan noted that in the case of WCPFC’s MOU with IATTC, there is a separate MOU on exchange 
and release of data and inquired regarding the differences between the two approaches. The Legal Adviser 
Stated that in the IATTC the exchange of data is in respect of highly migratory species, meaning there is 
much more data exchanged. SPRFMO does not cover highly migratory species, thus it is expected that much 
less data would be exchanged. The focus is more on what vessels are fishing in the area than on what they 
are catching. 
645. 
Japan inquired regarding the exchange of information about IUU vessels. The Legal Adviser stated 
that under the terms of the draft MOU, the IUU lists would be shared, but noted that simple sharing of the 
IUU vessel list did not implicate any cross listing.  
646. 
The Commission endorsed amendments to the draft text of an MOU between SPRFMO and 
WCPFC to be referred to SPRFMO for the consideration of the SPRFMO Commission. (Attachment 
X*) 
 
  
 
13.2.A.3  Climate Change (WCPFC16-2019-DP04 and DP04_SUPP) 
 
647. 
CCMs held an extensive discussion regarding the resolution. In the course of that discussion several 
CCMs noted the difficulty they faced in receiving approval from their national authorities for some of the 
resolution language being proposed. Several other CCMs spoke regarding their obligations under various 
international agreements to take strong action regarding climate change in all sectors, including fisheries. 
The issue was further discussed through a SWG on climate change.  
648. 
FSM, which served as the chair of the SWG on climate change, presented the outcomes of the SWG 
as presented in WCPFC16-2019-DP04_SUPP_rev3 11 December 2019.  
649. 
New Caledonia stated that all CCMs are impacted by climate change, with some suffering direct 
impacts during the course of the meeting (e.g., extensive fires in Australia and New Caledonia). It supported 
the resolution, noting it is a first step.  
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
105  
  
650. 
Fiji stated that it takes the issue of climate change very seriously, which it stated was already 
affecting many communities. It described the impacts on coastal fishermen, businesses and food security. 
At the national level, implementation is underway in Fiji, which committed to 100% sustainable 
management of Fiji’s EEZ by 2030 with at least 30% marine protected areas. To implement the Paris 
Agreement Fiji is creating a new law (the Climate Change Act), which will place climate action and ambition 
at the centre of all of Fiji’s obligations. Climate change impact is a cross-cutting issue, and Fiji is also 
working regionally on ocean issues; at the Pacific Islands Forum Leaders meeting in Tuvalu in August 2019, 
Forum Leaders agreed to the Kainaki II Declaration, which it considered the work programme on oceans 
within the UNFCCC process. Fiji stated that although climate change may not be a priority agenda for the 
Commission, most if not all of the members are also parties to the UNFCCC, where national governments 
are actively engaged in the issue across all sectors. It stated that climate change threatens over 60% of 
WCPFC members on a daily basis, and should command some attention in the dialogue, decisions and 
actions of the Commission. Fiji urged CCMs to align their efforts on fisheries management and the work of 
the Commission with this critical issue; supported the FFA proposal; and requested that the Commission 
task SPC and SC to focus their work programme and research, among others, on the management of tuna 
stocks due to the impacts brought about by climate change.  
651. 
 The EU supported the resolution, noting that climate change is a very important priority that extends 
across almost all sectors in the European Community. The EU referenced the importance of considering 
climate change impacts on fishing activities, as well as impacts of the related industry (e.g., harvesting and 
processing activities).  
652. 
French Polynesia stated that it was important for the Commission to demonstrate to the world that 
it is tackling the issue, noting that the Commission’s many island members are the most vulnerable globally 
to the impacts of climate change. French Polynesia stressed that this was a first step that establishes a 
framework for further work and supported the resolution. 
653. 
Niue supported the resolution, stating that this is priority, and noting the impacts on Tuvalu and 
others small states. Niue noted that it had hosted a side event at COP 25 (held in Madrid concurrently with 
WCPFC16) showing what SIDS are doing, and stated that taking action would show that the WCPFC is not 
working in isolation, but taking into account issues that affect everyone. 
654. 
France agreed that the issue is urgent and supported the resolution. 
655. 
Samoa noted that the resolution reflected instructions from Pacific leaders and stated that given the 
location of the WCPFC Convention area, it was a duty to pass the resolution. 
656. 
Canada noted the importance of climate change, and in particular the impacts being experienced in 
the region. It also stated that for Canada climate change was also a profound concern in the arctic. Canada 
appreciated the flexibility CCMs showed in reaching agreement.  
657. 
Tuvalu thanked FFA members for the work done, supported the resolution, and urged all members 
to agree.  
658. 
The Philippines stated it fully supported the objective of the resolution.  
659. 
WWF, on behalf of WWF, IELP, SFP, IPNLF, Pew, CI, and The Ocean Foundation, expressed their 
agreement with the FFA and congratulated the WCPFC on reaching agreement on a resolution on climate 
change. They stated that the issue that affects all members with interests in WCPFC fisheries, and in 
particular WCPFC16 heard the very clear message from FFA member states, which are among the first to 
directly experience the reality of climate change. Across the Pacific Islands, many are facing unprecedented 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
106  
  
challenges such as those described by Fiji, which also include flooding, saltwater intrusion into groundwater, 
and shoreline erosion. These directly impact the business of fisheries and, in turn, the Commission. 
Additionally, WCPFC16 received the best available scientific information from the science service provider, 
with projections for all stocks that do not bode well for the future. WWF reflected that during WCPFC16, 
the United States government authorities had closed the multi-million dollar Pacific cod fishery in the Gulf 
of Alaska for the first time in history, and that there was a sequential, and possibly related, collapse of the 
area’s lucrative crab fisheries. WWF stated that the idea that fisheries and climate change exist in isolation 
is false. WWF stated that this was a cautionary tale, which WCPFC must heed by taking steps to ensure 
climate change is considered in management actions. Management must be focused to ensure long-term 
sustainability, and therefore must consider stock resilience in relation to climate change, and engage in a 
precautionary approach to exploitation in all contexts. Failing this WCPFC could very well be in a similar 
situation as the Pacific cod fishery in 10 years, wondering where the fish have gone and wishing action had 
been taken sooner. Therefore, in view of the urgency of this issue and recognizing the Pacific Islands are 
most impacted by climate change, WWF again congratulated the WCPFC regarding the resolution on 
climate change with a view to establishing a formal CMM in the near future. 
660. 
The Commission adopted the Resolution on Climate Change as it Relates to the Western and 
Central Pacific Fisheries Commission. (Resolution 2019-01, Attachment X*). 
 
  
13.2.A.4 
  Expiry of Charter Notification CMM (WCPFC16-2019-DP01 and DP13 
 
661. 
The Commission agreed to extend the Charter Notification CMM (CMM 2016-05) for a further 
two years. (Conservation and Management Measure 2019-08, Attachment Y*).  
662. 
The Commission encouraged Chartering CCMs to report on their application of the chartering 
measure, to EEZs, high seas, or both EEZ and high seas. 
663. 
The Commission agreed that the Scientific Committee, the Technical and Compliance 
Committee, and the Commission will continue to consider improvements to the charter notification 
requirements and/or the treatment of chartered vessels under the Commission’s conservation and 
management measures more generally. 
 
13.3 
Election of Officers  
664. 
The Commission made a number of appointments to Commission positions commencing in 2020: 
a) Ms. Camille Movick-Inatio (FSM) and Mr. Michael Brakke (USA) were appointed as FAC Co-
Chairs; and 
b) Mr. Ueta Faasili Jr (Samoa) was appointed as SC Chair, and Dr. Tuikolongahau Halafihi (Tonga) 
as SC Vice-Chair. 
665. 
In support of 2020 Intersessional Working Group (IWG) activities, to be progressed 
electronically and as appropriate through face-to-face meetings, the Commission confirmed the 
following: 
a) Mr. Tom Graham (USA) would continue to lead the TCC Observer-related IWG; 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
107  
  
b) Mr. Craig Strong (Fiji) would continue to lead the South Pacific Albacore Roadmap IWG; 
c) Ms. Kerry Smith (Australia) would continue to lead the ERandEM IWG; 
d) Mr. Sam Lanwi (RMI) and Mr. Alex Kahl (United States) would continue to co-chair the 
Transhipment Review IWG;  
e) Mr. Terry Boone (USA) and Mr Vivian Fernandez (Australia) would co-chair the VMS SWG; 
f) Mr Bradley Philip (FSM) would continue to lead the FAD Management Options IWG; and 
g) Dr Robert Day (Canada) would lead the Compliance Monitoring Scheme IWG.  
 
13.4 
Future Meetings  
666. 
In 2020, the Commission agreed that:  
a) SC16 would be held in Apia, Samoa from Tuesday 11 August to Thursday 20 August 2020;  
b) NC16 would be in Japan at a date to be advised in early September 2020; 
c) TCC16 would be held in Pohnpei, FSM from Wednesday 23 September to Tuesday 29 
September 2020; and 
d) WCPFC17 would be held as a seven-day meeting with FAC13 and the HOD meeting held 
immediately prior, at a date to be advised in December 2020. As there was no offer to host the 
meeting, the Secretariat was tasked to find a suitable location for the meeting and advise CCMs 
and Observers accordingly. The Commission also approved the use of the working capital fund 
by the Secretariat, if necessary, to supplement the costs of the WCPFC17 meeting. 
667. 
In 2020, the Commission also agreed to the following Intersessional Working Group face-to-face 
meetings: 
a) South Pacific Albacore Roadmap would hold two face-to-face meetings, the first will be held 
immediately prior to SC16 in Apia, Samoa on Monday 10 August 2020 and the second would be 
held immediately following TCC16 in Pohnpei, FSM on Wednesday 30 September 2020;  
b) The FAD Management Options Working Group would hold its meeting alongside SC16 at a 
date to be advised, in Apia, Samoa; and  
c) The ERandEM WG would hold a two day face-to-face meeting immediately prior to TCC16 in 
Pohnpei, FSM from Monday 21 to Tuesday 22 September 2020.  
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 14 — OTHER MATTERS  
668. 
No other matters were raised for discussion at WCPFC16. 
 
WCPFC16 Summary Report issued 2 April 2020 
 
108  
  
 
AGENDA ITEM 15 — SUMMARY REPORT FOR WCPFC16  
669. 
The Chair outlined the process for adoption of the Summary Report for WCPFC16, with an 
outcomes document containing agreed decision points to be circulated to the Commission within seven 
working days following the close of the annual session, and the draft Summary Report to be provided as 
soon as possible. CCMs and observers would be given thirty working days after circulation of the draft 
Summary Report to provide any changes. The complete Summary Report would be finalised intersessionally 
and posted on the Commission website and representatives would be advised accordingly.  
  
AGENDA ITEM 16 — CLOSE OF MEETING  
670. 
CCMs expressed their gratitude to the Chair for her excellent leadership, to the Secretariat for its 
excellent support, and to its hosts the people and government of PNG for their very warm hospitality, 
excellent support and functions, and entertainment.  
671. 
The Chair expressed her thanks to PNG for hosting the meeting, as well as to all CCMs, the chairs 
of the various WGs, the Secretariat, SPC, and the NGOs and other observers.  
672. 
The meeting closed at 11:20 pm on Wednesday, 11 December 2019.  
 
