The Commission for the Conservation and Management of 
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean 
 
Fifteenth Regular Session of the Commission 
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA 
10–14 December 2018 
 
SUMMARY REPORT 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 1  — OPENING OF MEETING  
1. The Fifteenth Regular Session of the Commission for the Conservation and Management of Highly 
Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPFC15) took place from 10—14 
December 2018 in Honolulu, Hawaii, USA.  
2. The following Members and Participating Territories attended WCPFC15: American Samoa, Australia, 
Canada, the China, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI), the Cook Islands, the 
European Union (EU), the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), Fiji, France, French Polynesia, Guam, 
Indonesia, Japan, Kiribati, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI), Nauru, 
New Caledonia, New Zealand, Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea (PNG), the Philippines, Samoa, the 
Solomon Islands, Chinese Taipei, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, the United States of America (USA) 
Vanuatu, and Wallis and Futuna.    
3. The following non-party countries attended WCPFC15 as Cooperating Non-Members (CNMs): 
Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Panama, Thailand and Vietnam.  
4. Nicaragua attended WCPFC15 as a State observer.   
5. Observers from the following intergovernmental organizations attended WCPFC15: Inter-American 
Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC), International Scientific Committee for Tuna and Tuna-like 
Species in the North Pacific Ocean (ISC), North Pacific Fisheries Commission (NPFC), Pacific Islands 
Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA), Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS), Parties to the Nauru 
Agreement (PNA), the Pacific Community (SPC), Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment 
Programme (SPREP), Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO), University of 
the South Pacific, and The World Bank.   
6. Observers from the following non-governmental organizations (NGOs) attended WCPFC15: American 
Tunaboat Association (ATA), Australian National Centre for Ocean Resources and Security 
(ANCORS), Birdlife International, Blue Ocean Institute, Conservation International, Environmental 
 
2  
  
Defense Fund (EDF), International Environmental Law Project (IELP), International Pole and Line 
Foundation (IPNLF), International Seafood Sustainability Foundation (ISSF), Marine Stewardship 
Council, Ocean Friends Against Driftnets, Organisation for the Promotion of Responsible Tuna 
Fisheries, Organization for Regional and Inter-regional Studies, Pacific Islands Tuna Industry 
Association (PITIA), Pew Charitable Trust, Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center, Sustainable 
Fisheries Partnership Foundation, The Nature Conservancy (TNC), World Tuna Purse Seine 
Organisation (WTPO), and World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF). 
7. A full list of all participants is provided in Attachment A. 
8. The 15th regular session of the WCPFC was preceded with a Hawaiian Oli at 9:15am on Monday, 10 
December 2018. 
9. Following the traditional Hawaiian presentation, Reverend Kaleo Patterson offered a Pule (prayer and 
ceremony of cleansing). 
10. The WCPFC Executive Director, Feleti P Teo, OBE welcomed delegates to Honolulu. He observed that 
technically there was no official host government for WCPFC15 after the decision to relocate the 
meeting from Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), but thanked the United States for its 
financial contribution and logistical support, and the Western Pacific Fisheries Management Council 
(WPFMC) for its help in securing the meeting venue at short notice, and for the help with organizational 
arrangements. He expressed appreciation to the United States’ tuna industry for hosting the welcoming 
ceremony. The Executive Director noted that the meeting facility has a special place in the history of 
the Commission, as it is where the WCPFC Convention was adopted and opened for signature in 
September 2000. He highlighted the following three issues: the importance of the science–management 
dialogue in expediting the implementation of the harvest strategy workplan; review of the compliance 
monitoring scheme (CMS) and the need to agree on a measure that will allow the CMS to continue 
beyond 2018; and the need to adopt a corporate planning document for the Commission.  He closed by 
wishing delegates success in their deliberations. The full statement of the Executive Director is in 
Attachment B.  
11. The Commission Chair, Ms Rhea Moss-Christian, offered opening remarks in which she referenced the 
negotiations to establish the Commission. She noted that a number of individuals who were present 
when the Commission was established were again present at WCPFC15. The WCPFC was the first 
agreement established following adoption in 1995 of the UN Fish Stocks Agreement (FSA), and 
incorporates a number of key provisions of that Agreement, including the principle of compatibility, the 
need to take into consideration the special requirements of developing States, participation by territories, 
and adoption of the precautionary approach. She reviewed how the Commission has grown, as 
evidenced by its budget and the size of its reports.  She noted that conservation and management 
measures (CMMs) are in place for the key tuna species, and for a number of non-target, dependent and 
associated species, and that elements of a harvest strategy management approach are being developed 
and adopted. She noted that scientific knowledge forms the basis for the cornerstone of WCPFC 
management decisions, and that while national aspirations drive individual countries positions, a greater 
responsibility should be borne in mind, in light of the shared ancestry of the members of the 
Commission. She referenced two recent bold fisheries challenges put forth by Pacific Island leaders: the 
President of Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) challenged the region to eliminate illegal, 
unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing by 2023, and the President of Federated States of Micronesia 
(FSM) issued a challenge to achieve full transparency in tuna fisheries by 2023. She observed that it 
was not a coincidence that these two bold challenges came from two of the most vulnerable island 
nations, whose economies and futures are directly tied to the health of the tuna resources. She stated 
that WCPFC has the lead responsibility in meeting these challenges issued by the leaders of two of its 
 
3  
  
members, and that putting a timeframe to these tasks ensures that members stay focused and continue 
making ongoing progress. She acknowledged the hard work of the Executive Director and the 
Secretariat staff, and expressed gratitude to the United States and WPFMC for their arrangements and 
hospitality. She also noted that the Hawaiian Oli and the blessings received in the Pule served as 
significant reminders of the Commission’s origins. The Chair then officially opened the 15th regular 
session of the WCPFC. The full statement of the Commission Chair is in Attachment C.   
1.1 Adoption of Agenda  
12. The Agenda was adopted (Attachment D). 
 
1.2 Statements from Members and Participating Territories  
13. The United States welcomed delegates to Hawaii on behalf of the government of the United States and 
its Participating Territories, noting that representatives present included the Governor of CNMI. On 
behalf of all members, cooperating non-members and participating territories (CCMs) it thanked the 
Secretariat staff, local staff of United States agencies, and WPFMC, as well as industry stakeholders 
(Hawaii Longline Association, American Tunaboat Association, TriMarine, South Pacific Tuna Corp, 
and United Fishing Agency) who hosted the welcoming function.   
14. The Hon. Dennis Momotaro, Minister of Natural Resources and Commerce, and Chairman of the 
Marshall Islands Marine Resources Authority Board (RMI), noted that he was attending his first annual 
meeting of the WCPFC, and was eager to see why essential issues at WCPFC meetings are not being 
resolved. He stated that SIDS are most affected by the issues under discussion and his delegation was 
ready to engage constructively. He hoped CCMs could come to agreement on a number of critical issues: 
the need to review transhipments, the CMS process, and participation by small islands developing states 
(SIDS) and territories. He noted the challenge made by RMI for an IUU-free Pacific by 2023, and the 
challenge from FSM to institute all electronic monitoring (EM) of fisheries by 2023. He looked forward 
to meaningful outcomes from WCPFC15. 
15. The Hon. Ralph D Torres, Governor of CNMI, stated that in October CNMI was hit by a Category 5 
super typhoon that devastated Saipan and Tinian, but emphasized their resolve to rebuild. He thanked 
the State of Hawaii, federal agencies and the governments from neighbouring islands who provided aid. 
He stated that such devastation highlights the importance of food security and access to fisheries, and 
stated that CNMI shares many issues with other small islands, but lacks the capability to institute large-
scale  fisheries. He expressed interest in exploring how the Commission can help CNMI access benefits 
from fisheries. He noted the commitment to combatting IUU fishing in Micronesia, which will require 
assistance from governments and NGOs. He also noted the need for assistance in monitoring fisheries 
resources and acknowledged the importance of the issues before the Commission.  
16. France stated that, regarding the WCPFC-IATTC overlap area, France had drafted a letter of intent to 
WCPFC and IATTC to indicate its choice to favour WCPFC regulations during the next three years. 
This choice was motivated by a strong concern for clarification of the conservation and management 
regime applicable to French Polynesia’s vessels in the waters of this shared management zone. He stated 
that this legal clarification is not intended to call into question France’s participation in respect of its 
commitments to the IATTC. France continued to strongly support the harmonization of control and 
management rules between the two organizations, stating that it intended to maintain its high standards 
of control at sea and dockside monitoring. He also called for harmonization of high seas boarding and 
inspection measures between WCPFC and IATTC to enable more effective action against IUU fishing 
operations in the area, which faces permanent fishing pressure. France also expressed concern about 
 
4  
  
management of the Eastern High Seas Pocket (EHSP), ambiguities about its geographical configuration, 
and the lack of joint data available to neighbouring states and territories. France noted the need for better 
monitoring of fishing activity in the EHSP, such as through direct transmission of VMS data to Cook 
Islands, Kiribati and French Polynesia. He also addressed the need for management of drifting fish 
aggregation devices (FADs) and stated that there were many incursions into New Caledonia’s exclusive 
economic zone (EEZ) in violation of its laws. He noted most of these situations could be easily resolved 
by a single VHF contact in accordance with IMO resolution A 703, but that many vessels appeared not 
to monitor VHF channel 16.  
17. The Hon. Tetabo Nakara, Minister of Fisheries and Marine Resources of Kiribati, stated that the Western 
and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPO) connects all members and necessitates their cooperation. He 
encouraged CCMs to push for adoption of a precautionary approach to fisheries management and noted 
the need for improved science-based decision making. He congratulated the WCPFC for adopting 
several critical CMMs and FAD-related measures that have contributed to improvements in the status 
of tuna stocks, while noting the need to establish harvest control rules, with target reference points 
(TRPs). He noted that all members can understand why this is difficult and encouraged continued 
dialogue in search of new and innovative solutions to ensure tuna resources are sustainably managed. 
He acknowledged that all CCMs have specific interests, while thanking all members for helping take 
into account the needs of SIDS. He referenced Article 10.3(i) of the Convention, and their experience 
with the CMS, stating that the new proposed measure by FFA members is based on principles of fairness 
and efficiency, and hoped it would be adopted by members.  
18. The Hon. Marion Henry, Secretary of Resources and Development of FSM noted the many challenges 
in monitoring fishing in the region, and noted RMI’s declaration on IUU fishing, stating that all CCMs 
should be committed to 100% monitoring coverage to eliminate IUU fishing. He stated that FSM has 
committed to 100% monitoring of fishing in FSM’s EEZ by 2023 and was committed to full 
transparency through a combination of observer coverage and e-monitoring, which would provide much 
needed data on fisheries, and provide markets with assurance that catch is legal and sustainable with no 
slave labour involved. He expressed his hope that this will set the stage for global effort in this regard. 
He observed that the Commission can enhance sustainability, and reduce bycatch, and hoped that 
through this effort they can ensure the monitoring of over 50% of the tuna catch. He stated that FFA 
and PNA members are supportive of this effort. He stated that that they had a $2.3 million funding goal, 
and that The Nature Conservancy has contributed 10% of this goal. He asked for support from all 
stakeholders to find the technical and financial resources to put e-monitoring in place throughout the 
convention area. He also noted FSM’s desire to host an annual meeting of WCPFC, stating the 
importance of making decisions in places where people are most affected.  
19. The Hon. Lopao’o Natanielu Mu’a, Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries of Samoa acknowledged the 
work of the Commission and its decisions that greatly impact SIDS, including Samoa. He stated that on 
resource-constrained islands, living and non-living marine resources are essential resources, and tuna 
and other highly migratory species are critically important in providing food security, livelihoods and 
economic prosperity for Samoa. He noted key areas vital to Samoa and other SIDS. South Pacific 
Albacore tuna is the target species for Samoa’s domestic longline fishery, and a primary source of 
foreign revenue, food security and livelihoods. Failure to set a TRP for South Pacific albacore would 
further delay implementation of desired management interventions and prolong economic hardship and 
reduction in catches in Samoa’s fishery. He noted the subsidy support received by some foreign fleets 
and stated that an appropriate management strategy should be in place to ensure domestic and 
unsubsidized fleets remain economically viable. He asked CCMs, and particularly those interested in 
South Pacific albacore, to urgently develop an agreed, robust management arrangement for this species, 
including progressing with an agreement on various elements of a harvest strategy to reverse declining 
biomass trends and restore profitability. He noted Samoa is disadvantaged because its EEZ is zone-
 
5  
  
locked by the EEZs of other Pacific Island states, which limits its ability to realise its fishing interests 
and development aspirations, especially opportunities for profitable domestic fleet operations, and also 
impacts its small artisanal fishery.  He stated Samoa is considering exploring development opportunities 
in the closest high seas areas and asked other members to consider supporting its efforts.  He opposed 
any revision to the tropical tuna CMM that would limit the opportunity of SIDS to participate in high 
seas fishing until a high seas limit and a fair process for allocating that limit has been agreed to. He 
noted the combined challenges of collapsing fisheries resulting from increasing fishing effort (including 
IUU), environmental impacts, and climate change and stated that these challenges threaten the integrity 
of the oceans and marine ecosystems, and potentially the survival of Pacific Islanders.  In that regard, 
he stated that members should be mindful that the burden of actions to protect the oceans and manage 
its fisheries resources should not disproportionately fall on SIDS.    
20. The Hon. Semisi Tauelangi Fakahau, Minister for Agriculture and Food, Forestry, and Fisheries, of the 
Kingdom of Tonga, encouraged all participants to emphasise the importance of ensuring the sustainable 
management of tuna resources in the WCPO. He noted Tonga’s most important commercial fishery 
targets bigeye, yellowfin, albacore and other tuna-like species, with albacore tuna dominating the catch 
composition for many years. He stated Tonga’s wish that it would remain sustainable but noted a recent 
drop in catch rates in its national waters had hampered the fishing industry, affecting exports and the 
amount of fish available for local consumption. He stated that to maintain the long-term sustainability 
and economic viability of the tuna fisheries in the WCPO and secure livelihoods for local fishermen, it 
is important that stronger and more effective fisheries management arrangements for migratory tuna 
stocks and other species are agreed at WCPFC15. He highlighted the following priorities: (i) 
establishing a TRP for South Pacific albacore, and establishing management measures for the high seas 
fisheries; (ii) developing a new CMS that produces fair outcomes for CCMs and promotes and improved 
compliance, while recognizing the special requirements of SIDS, including by streamlining processes, 
strengthening capacity and requiring a widely consulted and well informed CMM 2013-06 SIDS impact 
assessment before a measure is adopted and used in the CMS; and (iii) renewal of the tropical tuna 
bridging measures, while retaining the additional high seas FAD closure, bigeye longline catch limits, 
and current purse seine effort limits on the high seas.  
21. The Hon. Dr Puakena Boreham, Minister for Natural Resources of Tuvalu stated that Tuvalu believes 
science-based management is essential if the Commission is to secure the sustainability of WCPFC 
fisheries, and looked to WCPFC15 to implement the SC recommendations that there should be no 
increase in fishing mortality of bigeye tuna; and that the fishing pressure in the albacore longline fishery 
should be reduced to improve its economic viability. She stated that the review of the tropical tuna 
measure should not allow any relaxation of the controls agreed for this fishery by WCPFC14, and that 
deliberations on a TRP for albacore must reflect the need to ensure that this fishery can maintain 
profitability. She also stated that the surface fishery in Tuvalu’s waters is very dependent on FADs. She 
stated that Tuvalu is happy to support proposals to make FADs more environmentally friendly so as to 
prevent entanglement of marine creatures, and to move towards bio-degradable FADs that do not add 
to the plastic pollution of the ocean, but that Tuvalu did not want to see changes in the definition of what 
constitutes a FAD (noting that fish associate with floating objects whether or not they have been 
deployed by a fishing boat) and do not want to see the limit on the number of FADs deployed by each 
vessel reduced. She stated Tuvalu was working with their partners in the PNA on other ways of 
improving FAD management. She also noted that Tuvaluan crew are working on a number of fishing 
vessels and Tuvalu has long aspired to see more of its people employed on vessels, but that Tuvalu is 
very concerned at the poor working conditions and low wages paid to crew in some fishing fleets. She 
stated that if continued this will bring the fishery of the region into disrepute and urged CCMs to support 
the FFA proposal on working conditions for crew, which despite being non-binding, was an important 
step. 
 
6  
  
22. PNG emphasised the importance of fisheries for SIDS and stated that the Commission must encourage 
adoption of measures that are fair and consistent, and do not place disproportionate burdens on SIDS. 
He noted the need to take precautionary measures to avoid a decline in stocks, and the need to promote 
sustainable fisheries that avoid any one member being worse off. He reaffirmed PNG’s sovereignty over 
its domestic waters, stating its wish to ensure measures apply to the high seas and EEZs, and not to 
waters landward of the EEZ. He noted that PNG was looking forward to hosting WCPFC16 in 2019.  
23. The Philippines observed it faces many challenges, and stated its compliance with CMMs is a work in 
progress, but that with an enhanced policy framework in place, ongoing structural reforms, and 
significant investments in infrastructure for enhanced fisheries management, it is confident that with the 
support of the Commission and the continuing cooperation with other CCMs their compliance will 
continue to improve. He noted that the Philippines’s access in high seas pocket No. 1 is limited to 36 
traditional catcher vessels. Catches in this area have a significant contribution to the Philippine economy 
and the food security of more than 102 million Filipinos. He stated that the Philippines intend to sustain 
the same CMM for the fleet in high seas pocket No. 1 and observed that the same FAD management as 
is currently in place. Philippine fishing operations in this area have 100% regional observer program 
(ROP) coverage as well as vessel monitoring system (VMS) coverage, including catch documentation 
and reporting to the Commission.  The Philippines looked forward to collaborating with other CCMs to 
achieve the priority goals and objectives of the Commission at WCPFC15. 
24. French Polynesia stated that, as indicated by France, it has made the choice to apply the rules of the 
WCPFC in its EEZ and the WCPFC-IATTC overlap area for its fleet, as recommended by the “WCPFC9 
decision on the WCPFC-IATTC overlap area”, paragraph (a) (iii). French Polynesia has a long history 
of cooperation in the WCPO as member of the Pacific Community, permanent observer of FFA, and 
Participating Territory of the WCPFC. French Polynesia expressed its gratitude to France for its support 
through this process. In choosing to apply the WCPFC CMMs to its activities, it hoped the Commission 
will make the best decisions to manage the tuna resources and consider the needs of the SIDS and 
Territories as set out in article 30 of the convention. He noted that French Polynesia has adopted a 
roadmap for the development of its fishing industry in compliance with the capacity building of the 
country and the potential of the tuna resources in its EEZ. To strengthen the development of the fishing 
industry, French Polynesia was certified by the Marine Stewardship Council for its albacore and 
yellowfin longline fisheries. To maintain this certification status, the tuna resources must be managed 
effectively on a long-term basis. To this end, French Polynesia expressed confidence that all the parties 
would reach consensus on the harvest strategies and the relevant harvest control rules and reference 
points for albacore, yellowfin and bigeye. French Polynesia also expressed concern about conservation 
of bycatch species, noting that the whole EEZ of French Polynesia is a sanctuary for marine mammals, 
turtles and sharks; some species of birds, including seabirds, are also protected. French Polynesia stated 
it is eager to adopt measures to protect those species provided the rules do not constitute a 
disproportionate burden for fishery development. French Polynesia also welcomed proposals to 
effectively regulate the use of FADs. 
25. Fiji stated that its priorities included South Pacific albacore TRPs, a harvest strategy for tropical tuna, 
and the CMS. It looked forward to the discussions and said it would provide additional statements 
outlining their specific interests during the course of the meeting.  
26. Australia stated it was a strong supporter of the WCPFC and that the Commission’s success is built on 
the hard work, cooperation and continued goodwill of its members. Australia stated its commitment to 
making progress on the tropical tuna measure, which is a foundation of WCPFC’s success and noted 
the responsibility to ensure that there are strong controls in place to manage these stocks that are critical 
to all members, and in particular SIDS. Australia anticipated an energetic discussion on the CMS, noting 
the need to focus on the commitment to improving compliance and implementation, and continuing to 
 
7  
  
demonstrate the effectiveness of this Commission.  Australia also expressed confidence that the 
Commission is on the right path towards harvest strategies  but that a better pathway was needed for 
scientists and manager to talk, and voiced strong support for the SC advice to establish a science-
management dialogue.   
27. The Cook Islands (speaking also as Chair of the Forum Fisheries Committee, and on behalf of FFA 
members) recognised the Chair’s leadership in advancing the Commission’s work and looked forward 
to her continued leadership.  She highlighted the following priorities of FFA members in WCPFC15:  
maintaining the strength of the well-balanced tropical tuna measure; adoption of a meaningful TRP for 
South Pacific albacore; adoption of a new CMS CMM;  ensuring effective participation of SIDS in the 
decision-making and work of the Commission, which is a key requirement to ensure that the 
Commission can fulfil its objectives; preventing cruel and unfair treatment of crew on board fishing 
vessels through passage of a resolution to encourage all CCMs to establish basic minimum labour 
standards, as a stepping stone to a future CMM;  review of the transhipment measure in 2019 to 
effectively regulate transhipment activities; and enactment of flexible arrangements to enable a periodic 
reduction in delegation sizes and thereby facilitate the hosting of Commission meetings by SIDS.   
28. The Hon. Dalton Tagelagi, Minister for Natural Resources of Niue stated Niue’s commitment to 
ensuring its sovereign rights and aspirations are protected. He stated that although Niue may be the 
smallest member, it is well aware of its responsibility to ensure resource use is sustainable. Niue looked 
forward to decisions on three key issues: (i) a TRP for South Pacific albacore; (ii) effective participation 
by SIDS at Commission meetings; and (iii) establishment of a high seas allocation for the purse seine 
fishery by 2019, and for the longline fishery by 2020. He noted the need for cooperation to ensure 
WCPO tuna resources are managed sustainably and reaffirmed Niue’s commitment to participating in 
and contributing to the work of the WCPFC. He noted that by working cooperatively the region could 
strengthen its fisheries management and contribute to the sustainability of resources for future 
generations. 
1.3 Meeting Arrangements  
29. The Commission reviewed the meeting arrangements and indicative meeting schedule, and confirmed 
decisions made at the Heads of Delegation meeting, held on Sunday, 9 December. 
 
1.3.1 
Establishment of small working groups (CNMs, CMR, others)  
30. The Commission considered the need for the establishment of small working groups (SWGs) to progress 
work on specific issues. Ten SWGs were established to consider the following issues: (i) finalization of 
the provisional Compliance Monitoring Report (pCMR), led by the Technical and Compliance 
Committee (TCC) Chair; (ii) the draft CMM on CMS under development intersessionally, led by the 
CMS intersessional working group (IWG) Chair; (iii) the tropical tuna CMM (led by the Commission 
Chair); (iv) south Pacific albacore TRP (led by Fiji); (v) requests for cooperating non-member (CNM) 
status (led by Australia); (vi) the TCC workplan (led by the TCC Vice-Chair); (vii) labour standards for 
crew (led by Vanuatu); (viii) the comprehensive CMM on sharks and rays (led by the Chair of IWG-
Sharks); (ix) seabirds (led by New Zealand); and (x) terms of reference for a science–management 
dialogue (led by the Commission Vice-Chair and Australia).  
31. Canada highlighted the range of SWGs that were established and observed the need over the longer term 
to establish a workplan for the Commission to help focus, organize and prioritize its work. He noted the 
alignment between this suggestion and the concerns of SIDS with respect to ensuring the ability of 
members to effectively participate in the work of the Commission.  
 
8  
  
 
1.3.2 
Hosting arrangements for WCPFC annual sessions hosted by SIDS  
32. The Chair opened the discussion on hosting arrangements for WCPFC annual sessions hosted by SIDS 
by noting that she and the Executive Director considered this to be a priority issue for discussion in light 
of the decision to change the venue for WCPFC15.  
33. Vanuatu, on behalf of FFA members, introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP15: Considerations for SIDS to 
host WCPFC Commission Meetings, which requests special consideration from the Commission and 
seeks flexibility, from time to time, to provide the opportunity for smaller island CCMs to host 
Commission meetings. They noted that the Commission had not adopted guidelines for hosting 
requirements, and that FFA members would continue to reject such suggestions, as this would 
effectively prevent some SIDS from hosting Commission meetings. They stated that the ability to host 
a Commission meeting in the countries that drove the establishment of this Commission is important, 
and that it is essential that Pacific peoples are provided the benefits derived from hosting delegations. 
More importantly, it provides an opportunity for those in the national fisheries administrations and 
domestic industries of SIDS to engage in and learn about the processes and work of the Commission. 
As such, they requested that CCMs accept that, from time to time, delegations will need to reduce the 
number of delegates they send to Commission meetings. To do this, they suggested that when a SIDS 
puts forward an offer to host a Commission meeting and meeting size will need to be restricted, that 
information on meeting capacity, infrastructure and logistics be provided to the Commission to inform 
their decision on what kind of actions and considerations each delegation would need to make to reduce 
their delegation size.  
34. The Chair noted WCPFC15-2018-OP03: Alternative options to enable SIDS to host WCPFC meetings, 
submitted by Pew, WWF, Birdlife, EDF, IELP, ANCORS and IPNLF, and thanked the observers for 
providing the paper.  
35. The United States thanked the FFA and observers for their papers. It acknowledged the desire of SIDS 
to host meetings and stated it would be happy to explore issues relating to this topic. The United States 
supported the suggestion that any logistical constraints be made known in advance, which would allow 
the Commission to make rational decisions on hosting and enable delegations to make appropriate 
decisions. The United States stated it would hesitate to have firm limits on delegation sizes, and limits 
on observers, but would be happy to work cooperatively with other CCMs in the future as needed. 
36. Japan acknowledged the large size of its delegation of 77 people at WCPFC15 and explained this 
resulted from Japan’s different fisheries (coastal, offshore and long distance) that target various species 
with different gear types. The large delegation is needed to enable Japan to adequately represent these 
differing interests and make rapid decisions during meetings. Japan stated that it was sympathetic with 
SIDS’ concerns, but supported the approach taken by the United States in not wishing to make firm 
commitments at WCPFC15, especially with respect to firm limits on delegation size. Japan noted very 
strict limits (such as a restriction to 10 people per delegation) would not be acceptable to Japan but 
welcomed future discussions. Japan suggested provision of specific information by prospective host 
countries (such as the number of hotel rooms, distance from hotel to meeting facility, and number of 
rental cars and flights) would be very helpful. It noted that it would make its best effort to reduce the 
size of its delegation if necessitated by limited host country capacity.  
37. FSM stated that it was hard for it to withdraw from hosting WCPFC15 as originally planned but 
understood that large delegations have interests in ensuring their participation. FSM thanked all CCMs 
and observers who were cooperating in trying to find solutions. They noted the realities of insufficient 
car rentals, hotel rooms, and other facilities, but stated that decisions made in the meetings affect SIDS. 
 
9  
  
It noted that FFA had submitted WCPFC15-2018-DP27: Proposal to Amend the Rules of Procedures 
– Rule 36 as a proposed amendment to rules of procedure, which would apply to all observers, and have 
the effect of removing the accreditation of any organization that does not participate for at least 3 years 
in one of the regular meetings of the Commission or its subsidiary bodies.  
38. Chinese Taipei recognized the aspirations of SIDS to host meetings but stated that it was not in favour 
of limits on delegation size, and preferred that each delegation should determine its own size. It thanked 
the NGOs for submitting WCPFC15-2018-OP03, and expressed support for idea of co-hosting 
arrangements.  
39. Korea thanked FFA and the observers for submitting papers. Korea stated that it fully understands the 
concerns raised by SIDS, and would need to reflect on limits to the number of delegates. It observed 
that some countries may need larger delegations than others, either because of language difficulties or 
interests at stake. It stated that it would be helpful to have suggestions from SIDS regarding delegation 
sizes, and looked forward to further discussion on the proposed amendment of the suggested change to 
the Commission’s Rules of Procedure as submitted in WCPFC15-2018-DP27. 
40. The EU stated it understood the concerns as expressed by SIDS and FFA members, noting that this was 
an important issue. The EU fully supported the need for large delegations to make efforts to reduce their 
size, and suggested hosting by SIDS was in particular an option for meetings of subsidiary bodies of the 
Commission. It encouraged flexibility by all CCMs. 
41. RMI expressed support for the views expressed by other FFA members. It noted that prior to the offer 
from FSM to host WCPFC15, which did not eventuate, Nauru had proposed hosting a Commission 
meeting, which also did not take place. RMI stated they would like to ensure that similar situations do 
not occur again in the future. It indicated that RMI would like to host the Commission meeting, and if 
it did propose to host, it would present all information required, and asked that all CCMs be flexible to 
enable RMI to host the Commission in the future. 
42. PNG fully supported the FFA proposal, which it observed contained flexibility to allow SIDS that could 
host large numbers to do so, and those that cannot to be upfront about what is possible. It welcomed 
further discussion, and noted that PNG has a large delegation, and uses the opportunity to progress work 
of national interest through bilateral and other meetings. 
43. Nauru presented draft language as contained in WCPFC15-2018-DP30: FFA Members proposed 
Recommendation under Agenda item 1.3.2. Following further consultations with members, FFA 
members proposed a revised recommendation addressing hosting of WCPFC meetings by SIDS.  
44. The Commission agreed that when a SIDS or participating territory makes an offer to host a WCPFC 
meeting which may need meeting size adjustment, that the offer include information on the available 
meeting capacity, logistics and infrastructure. The Commission will take this information into 
account when considering offers to host WCPFC meetings and, where needed, CCMs will endeavour 
to accommodate such constraints, including by reviewing delegation sizes. 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 2   — ANNUAL REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR   
45. The Executive Director introduced WCPFC15-2018-04: 2018 Annual Report of the Executive Director, 
which is a requirement under Rule 13 of the Commission’s Rules of Procedure. He noted that the 
absence of a strategic plan for the Commission makes reporting on accomplishment of strategic 
 
10  
  
priorities of the Commission difficult. Consequently, the annual report is structured as a historical 
account of key developments, achievements and challenges of the Commission and its Secretariat as 
they pertain to the implementation of decisions and agreements of the Commission. The Secretariat’s 
work programme is largely based on the decisions of the Commission and in accordance with the 
provisions of the WCPFC Convention. WCPFC14 effectively set the work programme for the 
Secretariat during 2018, with the main highlight being the adoption of CMM 2017-01. Specific tasks 
were sanctioned by WCPFC14 to be progressed intersessionally through the IWG meetings on 
electronic reporting and electronic monitoring (ER and EM) and FAD management options. Other 
intersessional work were agreed to be progressed through virtual working groups to consider a 
comprehensive approach for: sharks and rays management (IWG-Sharks); South Pacific albacore 
management (SPA-VIWG); the continuing review of the CMS and development of a new measure 
(CMS IWG); the development of a strategic investment plan for the special requirement fund; and access 
to observer reports and conduct of observers. These were in addition to the routine work in support of 
the annual meetings of the four subsidiary bodies of the Commission. Key highlights of achievements 
for 2018 include: timely submission of the report of the Independent Review Panel that reviewed the 
CMS; successful meetings of the Scientific Committee (SC), Northern Committee (NC) and TCC 
meetings; timely completion and delivery of the draft CMR; an updated stock assessment for bigeye 
tuna and stock assessments for South Pacific albacore, Pacific bluefin tuna, North Pacific swordfish, 
North Pacific shortfin mako shark, silky shark and whale shark; successful convening of the third 
meetings of IWGs on ER and EM, and FAD options; progress on the work of the IWG-Sharks to develop 
a comprehensive sharks and rays CMM; and good progress on the work of the CMS IWG, and 
implementation of the Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction Program (Common Oceans) (ABNJ) and 
Western Pacific East Asia (WPEA) projects. The Executive Director noted that staff numbers had been 
relatively stable, and financial affairs were in good order, with an unqualified audit report. He noted the 
voluntary trust fund contributions (itemized on pp. 8–9 of his report) and thanked the donors. He also 
noted the contributions made by SPC for scientific services; FFA for VMS services; and the ISC for 
scientific services for the NC. He acknowledged the presence of the director of IATTC, which is an 
important relationship because of the shared border and management area with the WCPFC. He also 
noted relationships with other Pacific regional organizations.  
46. Tonga, on behalf of FFA members, thanked the Executive Director and his senior officers for an 
excellent report. Tonga thanked the Executive Director for placing considerable emphasis on the issue 
of climate change when he reported in September to the Pacific Islands Forum Leaders in Nauru.  It 
stated that, as clearly articulated by Tokelau in the FAC meeting on 9 December, climate change is the 
greatest challenge facing all members, and particularly WCPFC’s SIDS members, both with respect to 
the future of their fisheries and their long-term survival. Tonga asked that all Commission members 
bear this in mind as the meeting progresses, stating that for many FFA member countries, the impacts 
of climate change are all too real, and it is essential that the Commission does everything it can, both to 
reduce its carbon footprint and to factor climate change impacts into the ongoing and future management 
of the key tuna stocks that are so critical to the future wellbeing of FFA members. Tonga stated that it 
looked forward to working together with members and the Secretariat to strengthen this aspect of 
WCPFC’s work in the years ahead and thanked the Executive Director and the Secretariat staff for their 
hard work throughout the past year. 
47. The EU encouraged active involvement by WCPFC in the Kobe Process among tuna regional fisheries 
management organisations (RFMOs), suggesting there is much to learn, share experiences and 
knowledge and discuss with other RFMOs, both at a broad, global level and on an issue-specific basis, 
including on FADs, where recent progress was made by other RFMOs. The EU inquired regarding a 
joint workshop with IATTC on bigeye tuna growth, and regarding funding for inclusion of the FLUX 
standard in WCPFC electronic reporting standards that was earmarked in the 2018 budget. In reply, the 
Chair noted the Kobe process would be addressed under Agenda Item 13. SPC indicated that IATTC 
 
11  
  
had invited SPC and other scientists to address bigeye growth at a workshop in January 2019 and that 
SPC and some CCMs would be taking part. The Secretariat stated that it would provide updates on 
funding for ER and EM during the meeting, and confirmed that Phase 2 of E-reporting for high seas 
transhipment reporting to accept data in XML conforming to FLUX standards would be scheduled in 
2019 subject to availability of budgetary funds (refer pp. 19 of the report) . The EU asked to be kept 
informed about the IATTC meeting. 
48. The Commission accepted the 2018 Annual Report of the Executive Director (WCPFC15-2018-04). 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 3  —  MEMBERSHIP AND OTHER APPLICATIONS 
3.1 Status of the Convention  
49. New Zealand, as depositary of the Convention on the Conservation and Management of Highly 
Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, presented WCPFC15-2018-05: Status 
of the Convention. It advised that since its last report in December 2017, New Zealand had not received 
notification of any instruments of ratification or accession to the Convention. 
50. The Commission noted the report on the Status of the WCPFC Convention (WCPFC15-2018-05). 
 
3.2 Update on Observer Status  
51. The Executive Director referred the meeting to WCPFC15-2018-06: List of Observers that provided 
the full list of observer delegations. A statement from the North Pacific Fisheries Commission was 
provided to WCPFC15 (WCPF15-2018-OP20). 
52. FSM, on behalf of FFA members, noted that they recognise Article 21 of the Convention, which 
promotes transparency in the decision making of the Commission. It also noted the various calls made 
by observers regarding participation in certain areas of the Commission’s work. However, as they have 
noted previously, they believe that the current process for observer status and participation requires 
strengthening. Under Agenda Item 1.3.2, FFA members (in WCPFC15-2018-DP27) suggested an 
improvement to the management of observer participation at Commission and subsidiary bodies’ 
meetings. They also noted their ongoing concern regarding yearly increases in the number of 
participants, which is making it increasingly difficult for many FFA members to host Commission-
related meetings. Considering this issue, FFA members have also suggested the Commission allow for 
flexible arrangements to enable FFA members to host WCPFC meetings. 
53. Kiribati, on behalf of FFA members, noted that at WCPFC13, it was agreed that NGOs are to contribute 
to the meeting expenses as determined by the Executive Director and pay registration fees. FFA 
Members requested that the requirements relating to contributions and fees also be applicable to Non-
Party Observers. In response to a request for clarification from the United States, the Chair indicated 
these were State observers as referred to in para.1 a) of WCPFC15-2018-06. The United States 
indicated it would like to have the opportunity for additional dialogue on the issue and would be 
interested in hearing from the State observers, what their views are, and whether they have a budget for 
this. In response to a query from Japan, the Chair indicated that only Nicaragua which is applying for 
CNM status was present as a State observer. 
 
12  
  
54. In response to queries from the United States regarding the “fishing entity” and the more general 
question from the EU regarding the proposed amendments to Rule 36 of the Rules of Procedure, FSM 
indicated that the language in the proposal in WCPFC15-2018-DP27 was consistent with the Rules of 
Procedure, and that the intent was to remove accreditation for the purpose of participation, as opposed 
to being an observer.  
55. The Commission noted the updated list of observers to the Commission (WCPFC15-2018-06).  
56. The Commission agreed to amend Rule 36 of the Commission Rules of Procedure as follows:  
“4bis 
The Commission will automatically revoke the observer participation of: 
(a) any observer organisation, State or fishing entity referred to in paragraph 1 (c), (d), or (e); and/or  
(b) a non-governmental organization pursuant to paragraph 4, unless that observer has participated 
in at least one (1) session of any of the Commission or its subsidiary bodies in the preceding three 
(3) years, with the three years being a rolling three-year period. The Executive Director shall notify 
the relevant organisation, State, fishing entity, or non-governmental organization in writing where 
this rule has been triggered, and observer status revoked, for that organization. 
 
4ter  
The automatic revocation of any observer status described in paragraph [4bis] (a) does 
not preclude that organization, State or fishing entity from reapplying for observer status to the 
Commission at any time. The automatic revocation of any observer described in paragraph [4bis] 
(b) does not preclude that non-governmental organization from reapplying for observer status at any 
time pursuant to paragraph 4.” 
 
3.3 Applications for Cooperating Non-Member (CNM) status  
57. The Commission considered applications for Cooperating Non-Member (CNM) status for 2019 in 
accordance with CMM 2009-11, including recommendations from the 14th meeting of the Technical 
and Compliance Committee (TCC14). As outlined in WCPFC15-2018-07: Cooperating Non-Member 
Requests for 2019, eight applications for CNM status were received from Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, 
Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Thailand and Vietnam.  
58. Tokelau, on behalf of FFA members, noted that Mexico has refused to make a commitment to accept 
high seas boarding and inspection (HSBI), citing that they have no vessels authorised to fish in the 
WCPO. Mexico is non-complaint with para 11(e) of CMM 2009-11 which expressly requires CNMs to 
“accept boarding in accordance with Commission high seas boarding and inspection procedures”. They 
noted that if Mexico has no vessel authorised to fish in the WCPO, there is even more reason to accept 
boarding to ensure no unauthorised fishing activity occurs by any of its vessels. Additionally, FFA 
members maintained their full support for the WCPFC11 decision that CNMs are to provide a 
contribution to the Commission. This is premised on the principle that all participants in the organisation 
must share the costs of conservation and management of these stocks, and the contribution is 50% of 
the amount that would be payable if the CNM was a member. They noted that all other CNMs had paid 
their financial contribution for 2018, as required under paragraph 2(g) of CMM 2009-11, and thanked 
them for this, but stated that Mexico had not paid their contribution for 2018. For those reasons, FFA 
members asked that Mexico’s application for renewal for CNM status be denied unless these issues 
could be resolved during WCPFC15.  
59. Nauru, on behalf of the PNA, strongly supported the statement made by Tokelau on behalf of FFA 
members. It stated that they were no longer prepared to accept the situation where a CNM dictates to 
 
13  
  
the Commission which CMMs they would adhere to, noting that discretion is not given to them in their 
duty to cooperate under the UN FSA, and is inconsistent with CMM 2009-11. 
60. The United States thanked delegations for raising those concerns. In reply to their inquiry seeking 
confirmation if a representative from Mexico was present, the Chair noted that Mexico did not have a 
representative present.  
61. Palau, on behalf of FFA members, stated that renewal of CNM status under CMM 2009-11 is conditional 
upon (a) compliance with measures adopted by the Commission and the fisheries laws and regulations 
of coastal States in the Convention Area, and (b) compliance with conditions in paragraph 11 of the 
measure, which includes the acceptance of high seas boarding and inspection. CMM 2009-11 para. 15 
is very clear that a CNM that fails to comply with any of the CMMs is deemed to have undermined the 
effectiveness of the CMM and the Commission must take appropriate action including the revocation 
of CNM status and non-renewal. They stated that some CNMs have repeatedly been assessed as non-
compliant with CMM obligations, and that the Commission must take appropriate action with respect 
to these CNMs. Further, all CNMs must comply with the requirements under CMM 2009-11, which 
some are currently not doing. The 2018 provisional CMR identifies that five CNM applicants were rated 
either non-compliant or priority non-compliant for 2017 activities. The Commission must consider the 
compliance status of CNMs when considering their applications. Compliance by CNMs with the 
measures adopted by the Commission is essential, and a clear requirement to participate in the 
Commission as a CNM. The Commission must take into account CNMs’ level of compliance when 
determining whether or not to renew their CNM status.  Finally, they noted it is in CNM applicants’ 
own interest to provide complete and accurate data and information. 
62. Samoa stated its view that Mexico’s application should be denied, and that it should show a willingness 
to comply with the CMMs. 
63. The Chair noted that as a matter of procedure, the Commission would accept or reject the application, 
and if accepted, refer it to the SWG to consider participatory rights. She noted Mexico’s application was 
not supported by CCMs in the absence of significant changes.  The Chair further noted that TCC had 
noted insufficient information was available regarding Nicaragua’s CNM status request and referred the 
matter to the Commission. The Chair advised the application could be referred to the SWG for further 
consideration. 
64. Palau, on behalf of FFA, thanked Nicaragua for its interest in applying for CNM status, and noted that 
this was the first time Nicaragua had applied to be a CNM. In its application, Nicaragua indicated its 
commitment to comply with requirements under CMM 2009-11. FFA members sought further 
information on the following: (i) noting that Nicaragua is a member of IATTC and ICCAT, FFA 
members inquired regarding its compliance status with these RFMOs; (ii) noting it has 7 purse seiners, 
inquired regarding its vessels’ compliance status in the RFMOs in which it fishes; and (iii) asked what 
type of fishing activities, if other than purse seining, Nicaragua is interested in participating in within 
the WCPO.  
65. Nicaragua stated it was were happy to answer any questions, and that it complies with all rules in IATTC 
and ICCAT. It indicated its readiness to comply with WCPFC CMMs and offered to give more 
information to the SWG. 
66. PNG, on behalf of FFA members, stated that the decision of the Commission regarding financial 
contributions by CNMs was very clear. The non-payment of contributions and the lack of commitment 
to do so has been a subject of extensive discussion at previous Commission meetings. They stated that 
FFA members will not agree to CNM status for any applicant that has not paid outstanding financial 
 
14  
  
contributions or is unable to commit to making the contribution for the following year. Additionally, 
the Commission must take appropriate action for those CNMs that have blatantly undermined any 
CMMs and any requirement prescribed by the Commission.  
67. The United States indicated it would be happy to have discussions regarding Nicaragua’s application. 
Regarding the broader issues, it noted that it did not consider financial contributions from CNMs to be 
a binding requirement. It stated that States faced a range of considerations in making voluntary 
contributions. WCPFC rules state that financial contributions are required only from States that are 
eligible to be members, but a number of CCMs have made it clear they do not wish to consider new 
members, suggesting CNM applicants should not be required to make financial contributions.  
68. The Chair asked the SWG to consider Nicaragua’s application, which would be returned to plenary, 
with the financial contribution considered at that time.   
69. Solomon Islands, on behalf of FFA members, stated that TCC14 noted that Panama provided its Annual 
Report Parts 1 and 2, but that there were reporting gaps requiring clarification. The Secretariat wrote to 
Panama (letters dated 19 October 2018) identifying the gaps and requesting the provision of additional 
information 30 days before WCPFC15, while Panama provided additional information on December 8. 
They noted that Panama was consistently non-compliant in the South Pacific Regional Fisheries 
Management Organisation (SPRFMO) for serious violations of its obligations, and it was unclear 
whether Panama had addressed those non-compliance issues.  
70. The Commission agreed to accept the applications for renewal of CNM status in 2019 submitted by 
Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Thailand and Vietnam. Members deferred consideration of requests from 
Mexico, Nicaragua and Panama pending further review by the SWG.  
71. The SWG considering the CNM participatory rights made the following recommendations, in 
WCPFC15-2018-CNM_SWG01: SWG CNM Report (Final): 
i 
The SWG noted with appreciation the attendance and participation of Ecuador, Liberia, Panama and 
Nicaragua.  
ii The SWG agreed to recommend that the CNMs accepted by the WCPFC plenary (i.e. Ecuador, El 
Salvador, Liberia, Thailand and Vietnam) have the same participatory rights in 2019 as they had in 
2018. 
iii Noting Nicaragua was a new CNM applicant, the SWG asked Nicaragua for further information on 
its compliance in IATTC and ICCAT, and to outline its prospective interests in the WCPFO. 
iv Nicaragua submitted documentation, including a letter of good standing from IATTC and evidence 
that no Nicaraguan flagged vessel was on either the IATTC or ICCAT IUU Vessel List.  Nicaragua 
explained that it was a Member of ICCAT but had no active fishing vessels in its Convention Area. 
Nicaragua affirmed its commitment to make a voluntary contribution. On the basis of the 
information provided, the SWG agreed to recommend that the Commission accept Nicaragua’s 
application. 
v 
With respect to Nicaragua’s participatory rights, the SWG recommends that Nicaragua’s 
participatory rights should be limited to purse seine fishing for one vessel, with no participatory 
rights for fishing on the high seas for highly migratory fish stocks in the Convention Area. The 
SWG further agreed to recommend that any introduction of fishing capacity is to be in accordance 
with paragraph 12 of CMM 2009-11 and CMM 2017-01 or its replacement measure. 
vi The SWG noted that Mexico had neither attended the Commission meeting nor responded to the 
Executive Director’s letter, and that this made it challenging to assess Mexico’s application. Some 
 
15  
  
members reiterated the importance of accepting a commitment to accept high seas boarding and 
inspection and a voluntary contribution; while other Members indicated flexibility on these aspects, 
noting that such commitments can be difficult to make in the absence of a binding treaty-level 
obligation. 
vii There was no consensus to recommend acceptance of Mexico’s CNM status. 
viii The SWG considered Panama’s application, noting the TCC’s advice that Panama had submitted 
its Part 1 and Part 2 Reports on time but that there were reporting gaps that could require 
clarification, and that some CCMs had also noted that Panama is consistently non-compliant in 
SPRFMO. 
ix Panama explained that it had worked closely with the SPRFMO Secretariat to address its 
outstanding data and compliance issues. 
x 
The SWG, with the support of Panama, recommends to WCPFC15 that Panama’s application be 
accepted, and that Panama should: 
a. Prepare an action plan outlining how it will improve its compliance with WCPFC, including to 
ensure that relevant data is provided on time and any improvement to its internal procedures 
necessary to improve its cooperation with WCPFC. This Action Plan should be provided to the 
Commission no later than the end of January 2019, and circulated to all CCMs; 
b. Provide all outstanding data no later than the end of January 2019 to the Secretariat; and 
c. Enhance its engagement with the Secretariat to ensure it can meet relevant reporting requirements. 
xi The SWG agreed that Panama’s participatory rights should remain as they were in 2018.  
   
72. The Commission approved the applications for CNM status for 2019 from Ecuador, El Salvador, 
Liberia, Nicaragua, Thailand and Vietnam. 
73. WCPFC also approved the application for CNM status for 2019 from Panama, subject to Panama: 
a 
Preparing an action plan outlining how it will improve its compliance with WCPFC, 
including to ensure that relevant data is provided on time and any improvement to its internal 
procedures necessary to improve its cooperation with WCPFC.  This Action Plan should be 
provided to the Commission by no later than the end of January 2019, and circulated to all 
CCMs; 
b 
Providing all outstanding data by no later than the end of January 2019 to the Secretariat; and 
c 
Enhancing its engagement with the Secretariat to ensure it can meet relevant reporting 
requirements. 
 
74. Ecuador thanked WCPFC15 for approving Ecuador’s CNM application and reminded delegates that 
Ecuador has been insisting on the need to have a legal and transparent procedure for accession to full 
membership of the WCPFC. It noted that a change in the CNM application format was implemented by 
WCPFC13 asking applicants whether they would want to become a full member, and observed that this 
information had been useless, because no further steps had been taken to set up rules to make this 
happen. Ecuador stated that the United States presented a discussion paper in 2017 (WCPFC14-2017-
DP18: Membership process in WCPFC), which addressed the most relevant elements of the issue, but 
action has not been taken to develop a procedure to address the issue. It stated that Ecuador has been a 
 
16  
  
CNM for many years, and that Ecuador and other Latin American and Asian countries had been asking 
to be full members for several years but had not received an adequate answer. Ecuador observed that 
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and the UN FSA state that RFMOs 
shall not discriminate against any state or group of states having a real interest in the fisheries concerned. 
It stated that in coming to WCPFC annual meetings year after year and asking WCPFC to address the 
issue but not being listened to made them feel very much discriminated against as a country and member 
of the international community. It reminded delegates that following adoption by IATTC of a new 
Convention in 2003 (The Antigua Convention) several countries including, Belize, Canada, China, and 
Kiribati — became full members of the RFMO very easily, without impediments. It recalled having 
heard that the WCPFC is considered unique and stated that while it was sure this was the case, that 
uniqueness could not contravene specific principles of international law and the WCPFC Convention 
itself. Ecuador emphasized that the fear that some member countries might feel with regard to accepting 
new members had no basis, because it was very clear to it that becoming a member would not carry any 
automatic entitlement for participatory rights different than those it had as a CNM. Ecuador closed by 
encouraging delegates to set up a transparent framework and conditions for inviting new members, and 
specifically asked the Commission to accept Ecuador to become a full member. 
75. The United States thanked Ecuador for its statement and agreed that the issue of membership was 
important. The United States noted it had not submitted an update to WCPFC14-2017-DP18 because 
there was not a lot of new information available, and the Commission had a very full agenda. It observed 
there was no apparent way forward, noting that some members obviously view the Commission as 
closed, while it and other CCMs had a different view. The United States acknowledged that invitations 
to new membership required consensus and stated it had never suggested that any particular application 
should be approved, but only that there should a clear process for application, and an examination of 
the costs and benefits of accepting new members. It indicated this was only fair to other members of the 
international community that had asked to be considered for membership. The United States indicated 
it would be happy to discuss the issue intersessionally. 
76. Tuvalu, on behalf of FFA members, reiterated that the application for CNM status is not a stepping stone 
to becoming a full member of the WCPFC.  
77. The EU expressed agreement with the intervention from Ecuador. It stated that according to UNCLOS 
and the UN FSA, countries with fishing interests for highly migratory species in the region had the right 
to become full members of the WCPFC, and to refuse membership the WCPFC would need to have 
good reasons. The EU stated the WCPFC risked having a case presented to the International Tribunal 
on the Law of the Sea, which would not be good for the Commission.  
78. Canada encouraged holding a dialog as suggested by the United States.  
79. Palau, on behalf of PNA, stated that new members must be invited by consensus. It stated that the 
language had been carefully drafted to reflect the special situation of the Commission, and that they did 
not see that changing in the future.  
3.3.1 
Participatory rights of CNMs   
80. The Commission agreed to the following limits to be applied to the participatory rights of CNMs 
(Convention / CMM 2009-11): 
 
17  
  
a) In accordance with the WCPF Convention and its conservation and management measures and 
resolutions, the following participatory rights apply to CNMs for fisheries in the high seas within 
the WCPFC Convention Area;  
b) In addition, unless otherwise specified below, CNMs may fish in waters under their national 
jurisdiction or other CCMs’ national jurisdiction, in accordance with appropriate bilateral 
arrangements;  
c) CNMs shall ensure vessels flying their flags comply with all provisions of the WCPFC 
Convention and the WCPFC conservation and management measures. In addition, CNM vessels 
will be placed on the WCPFC Record of Fishing Vessels (WCPFC RFV);  
d) CCMs shall ensure that CNM fishing activities that are conducted in waters under their national 
jurisdiction in accordance with bilateral arrangements are consistent with all relevant 
conservation and management measures and provisions of the WCPF Convention; and  
e) Renewal of CNM status by the Commission will take into account compliance with the national 
laws and regulations of any licensing CCM, and all conservation and management measures and 
provisions of the WCPFC Convention. CCMs shall identify any violations by vessels flagged to 
a CNM and report on any investigations of such violations to the Secretariat for attention by 
TCC. 
 
Participatory rights of each CNM in 2019 
 
81. Ecuador: The participatory rights of Ecuador for fishing in the WCPO are limited to purse seine 
fishing, with no participatory rights for fishing on the high seas for highly migratory fish stocks in 
the Convention Area. Any introduction of purse seine fishing capacity is to be in accordance with 
paragraph 12 of CMM 2009-11 and CMM 2018-01 or its replacement measure.  
82. El Salvador: The participatory rights of El Salvador for fishing in the WCPO are limited to purse 
seine fishing only. The total level of effort by purse seine vessels of El Salvador on the high seas shall 
not exceed 29 days in the Convention Area. Any introduction of purse seine fishing capacity is to be 
in accordance with paragraph 12 of CMM 2009-11 and CMM 2018-01 or its replacement measure.  
83. Liberia: The participatory rights of Liberia are limited to reefer vessels to engage in transhipment 
activities, and bunker and supply vessels to support fishing vessels in the Convention area. 
84. Nicaragua: The participatory rights of Nicaragua are limited to purse seine fishing for one vessel, 
with no participatory rights for fishing on the high seas for highly migratory fish stocks in the 
Convention Area. Any introduction of fishing capacity is to be in accordance with paragraph 12 of 
CMM 2009-11 and CMM 2018-01 or its replacement measure. 
85. Panama: The participatory rights of Panama in the WCPO are limited to the provision of carrier and 
bunker vessels. Panama’s participatory rights also apply to vessels that supply food, water and spare 
parts to carrier vessels that engage in transhipment activities, provided that these vessels do not 
engage in activities supporting fishing vessels, including providing and/or servicing FADs.  
86. Thailand: The participatory rights of Thailand in the WCPO are limited to the provision of carrier 
and bunker vessels only.  
 
18  
  
87. Vietnam: The participatory rights of Vietnam in the WCPO are limited to the provision of carrier 
and bunker vessels only.   
 
WCPFC/IATTC Overlap Area  
 
88. In accordance with the decision of WCPFC9 regarding the management of the overlap area of 4˚S 
and between 130˚W and 150˚W, vessels flagged to Ecuador, El Salvador Mexico, Nicaragua and 
Panama will be governed by the IATTC when fishing in the overlap area.  
89. In accordance with the Data Exchange MOU agreed by both Commissions, fishing vessels flying the 
flag of a member of either the IATTC or WCPFC shall cooperate with the RFMO to which they are 
not a member by voluntarily providing operational catch and effort data for its fishing activities for 
highly migratory species in the overlap area.  
90. For the purpose of investigation of possible IUU fishing activities and consistent with international 
and domestic laws, vessels flying the flag of a CNM that is a Contracting Party to the IATTC will 
cooperate with those coastal State members of the WCPFC whose EEZs occur in the overlap area by 
voluntarily providing VMS reports (date, time and position) to those coastal States when operating 
in the overlap area. 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 4  — NEW PROPOSALS   
4.1 Marine Pollution  
91. Canada presented WCPFC15-2018-DP02: Discussion paper — potential future amendments to 
WCPFC CMM on marine pollution (2017-04), which proposes changes to the measure for consideration 
(at WCPFC15, or when it is evaluated in the future). Canada suggested modifications to strengthen 
requirements regarding retrieval and reporting of lost fishing gear by vessels operating in the 
Convention Area.  
4.2 Non-Entangling FADs 
92. The EU introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP01: Proposal for amending CMM 2017-01 for the use of non-
entangling FADs in WCPFC fisheries.  
93. The issue was addressed under Agenda Item 6.3.1a.  
4.3 FAD Definitions 
94. The United States introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP03: Proposal for a definition of fish aggregating 
device, and Korea introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP17: Proposed changes to conservation and 
management measure 2009-02 on the application of high seas FAD closures and catch retention.  
95. The issue was addressed under Agenda Item 6.3.1c. 
 
19  
  
4.4 Bigeye Longline Catch Limits 
96. The United States introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP04: Proposal on bigeye longline catch limits in 
longline fisheries: Conservation and Management Measure on Tropical Tunas, which addresses para. 
40 of the measure and proposes an objective method to adjust CCMs’ longline bigeye tuna catch limits 
to account for their respective levels of monitoring and control, particularly with respect to observer 
coverage levels and at-sea transhipment activity.  
97. Korea thanked the United States for its efforts to fight IUU fishing and to submit a plan to improve 
reliability of data on the longline fishery, while noting the need for further consideration of the issue. 
Korea noted that the United States faces different conditions than other fishing nations, as it has Hawaii 
and American Samoa available as fishing bases, and stated that in its view it would be inappropriate to 
directly link observer and transhipment coverage to catch limits. It suggested the need for further 
discussion.   
98. The issue was considered by the SWG on the tropical tuna measure, refer Agenda Item 6.3.1. 
4.5 IMO Numbers 
99. The United States introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP05: Amendment to CMM 2017-05 to expand the 
requirement for IMO numbers.  
100. 
The issue was addressed under Agenda Item 9.3.3.  
4.6 Sea Turtles 
101. 
The United States introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP06: Revisions to CMM 2008-03 Conservation 
and Management Measure of Sea Turtles and WCPFC15-2018-DP07: Amendments to the WCPFC 
Regional Observer Programme Minimum Standard Data Fields.  
102. 
The issue was discussed under Agenda Item 8.5. 
4.7 South Pacific Albacore Target Reference Point 
103. 
 Fiji, on behalf of FFA members, introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP10: Proposal for establishing a 
target reference point for south Pacific albacore.  
104. 
The issue was addressed under Agenda Item 6.2.2. 
4.8 Implementation of CMM 2013-06 
105. 
Cook Islands, on behalf of FFA members, presented WCPFC15-2018-DP12_rev1: Views on the 
implementation of CMM 2013-06 (CMM on the Criteria for the Consideration of Conservation and 
Management Measures), stating they were pleased to see some improvement in how CMM proponents 
complete CMM 2013-06 impact assessments, although much improvement in the quality of the 
assessments was needed, which reflects CCMs’ poor understanding of what SIDS considerations are 
when these CCMs are designing potential measures. They noted that to overcome this, proponents must 
consult with SIDS, which is a fundamental element of the CMM 2013-06 assessments. Without this 
input, proponents will not be able to address implementation issues and adequately identify 
disproportionate burden, which requires collaboration and consultation with SIDS before proposals are 
submitted to WCPFC. WCPFC15-2018-DP12 (rev.1) seeks to help address this issue; it includes an 
 
20  
  
annotation of the questions in paragraph 3 of CMM 2013-06 for the SIDS impact assessments, to provide 
more structured guidance to inform how responses are developed. They hoped the Commission would 
find this useful to support CCMs in their development of proposals. They stated that genuine 
consideration of CMM proposals by SIDS requires active engagement, and that FFA members meet 
every year in October for management options consultations (MOC), which are dedicated to developing 
and reviewing work that will contribute to the annual Commission meeting, which was an opportune 
time for consideration of proposals. They thanked CCMs who provided proposals for consideration 
during their MOC meeting and looked forward to working with others and further enhancing the 
development and use of CMM 2013-06 assessments. 
106. 
RMI supported the comments by Cook Islands on behalf of FFA, while noting the number of 
proposals submitted under Agenda Item 4 at WCPFC15 and stressing it would consider CMM 2013-06 
and its applicable mechanisms with respect to any proposals under consideration. 
107. 
The United States stated that guidance on how to improve implementation would be useful, but that 
it had not anticipated it would be formally adopted. It suggested that the delegation paper be noted, or 
the issues be further developed intersessionally. This position was supported by the EU; it also stated it 
understood the concerns expressed by FFA and underlined that it always assesses the potential impact 
of their proposals on SIDS but might face difficulties in exactly determining these impacts.  
108. 
RMI noted CMM 2013-06 continued to be less than effective from the view of SIDS and 
participating territories, and the guidelines were being suggested to help in implementing the CMM and 
to help all CCMs meet their obligations; it stressed WCPFC15-2018-DP12 contained guiding questions, 
not obligations. RMI also thanked Japan for its continuous engagement with SIDS.  
109. 
The EU thanked RMI and stated that it sought to faithfully implement CMM 2013-06 whenever it 
proposes a measure, and to engage proactively with FFA. It welcomed having the document as a 
reference submitted by FFA, but not as document to be approved by the Commission. 
110. 
In the ensuing discussions, the Commission explored various ways in which the document could be 
made available to members for reference.  
111. 
The Commission tasked the Secretariat to include WCPFC15-2018-DP12_rev1 providing FFA 
CCM views on the implementation of CMM 2013-06, on the webpage that will be established for 
and dedicated to the Implementation of Article 30 of the Convention.   
 
4.9 Labour Standards 
112. 
Vanuatu, on behalf of FFA members, introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP13: Draft Resolution on 
Labour Standards for Crew on Fishing Vessels, and stated that Ministers from FFA members had 
reiterated that human rights abuses on fishing vessels operating in the Pacific must be addressed, and 
emphasised specifically the need for improved labour standards for all crew, including as part of the 
ongoing promotion of opportunities for Pacific Islanders working in the fishing industry. They stated 
the issue had rightly received significant international attention, thanked CCMs for providing 
constructive comments on the proposal to date, and voiced their appreciation for the support from all 
CCMs and the Commission to address the issue. They invited other CCMs to engage with FFA members 
in the margins of WCPFC15 to support progress of this resolution, including suggestions for 
improvement, and stated they view the resolution as a vital first step to ensure CCMs work 
constructively together to eliminate all human rights abuses inflicted on crew on fishing vessels. They 
 
21  
  
noted it was fitting that this was being discussed on the 70th Anniversary of the Declaration on Human 
Rights. 
113. 
The issue was further discussed by a small working group.  
114. 
The EU stated it fully supported the principles put forward, that these were present in its own laws, 
and that its vessels fully respected them, but expressed doubts about the legal basis of the WCPFC to 
adopt a Resolution on labour standards under Article 10(h) of the Convention. This view was supported 
by Japan, who also supported the concept, but questioned whether the Commission was the proper venue 
to address the issues and stated it would not support the resolution being converted to a binding 
document in a future Commission meeting. China thanked Vanuatu for accommodating its concerns 
during the course of small working group discussions, and stated its belief that the issue should be 
addressed elsewhere, but agreed to support the resolution because it was not binding. 
115. 
The Commission adopted Resolution 2018-01 on Labour Standards for Crew on Fishing Vessels 
(Attachment E) 
 
116. 
WWF, on behalf of IPNLF, WWF, Pew, and BirdLife International, commended the Commission 
for adopting the Resolution on Labour Standards for Crew on Fishing Vessels. They noted that WCPFC 
is the first tuna RFMO to consider this issue, and they thanked the Commission for its leadership in 
progressing fishery worker protections. They stated that human rights and labour abuses occur around 
the world, including in Pacific tuna fisheries, with stories of fishers being paid less than what they were 
promised, and stories of fishers being beaten, enslaved, or murdered. They stated that buyers and 
consumers expect their tuna to be free of human exploitation, and WCPFC has taken an important step 
in response. They supported WCPFC’s initiative in passing the resolution and urged the Commission to 
consider how to make the provisions substantive and effective.  
117. 
Vanuatu noted the important progress WCPFC had made on many issues, and emphasized the 
importance of this accomplishment, stating that poor labour conditions and mistreatment of crew cannot 
be tolerated, and it was essential all crew are afforded their basic human rights. Cook Islands also 
commended all members on taking a decision to protect the welfare of crew on fishing vessels. Cook 
Islands stated that the resolution was a first step and it would continue to work on the issue until workers 
at sea are more effectively protected. Indonesia expressed appreciation to FFA for their efforts and for 
the leadership shown by Vanuatu on the issue, and echoed Cook Island’s view that this marked only a 
first step in protecting and ensuring the safety of labour at sea. 
4.10 
Seabird Mitigation 
118. 
New Zealand introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP16: Seabird Interaction Mitigation: Amendment of 
CMM 2017-06.  
119. 
The issue was addressed under Agenda Item 8.4.   
4.11 
TCC Workplan 
120. 
The TCC Vice-Chair (RMI) introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP19: Update of TCC Workplan.  
121. 
The issue was addressed under Agenda Item 9.3 
 
22  
  
4.12 
Pacific Bluefin Tuna 
122. 
Japan introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP25: Proposal for amending Conservation and Management 
Measure for Pacific Bluefin Tuna (CMM2017-08).  
123. 
The issue was addressed under Agenda Item 6.4.  
4.13 
Effective Participation of SIDS  
124. 
Niue introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP26: Proposal to amend the financial Regulations for the 
effective participation of SIDS.  
125. 
The issue was addressed under Agenda Item 5.  
4.14 
High Seas Boarding and Inspection: Authorities of the Fishing Vessel  
126. 
The United States introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP31: High Seas Boarding and Inspection: 
Authorities of the Fishing Vessel (originally notified under Circular 2018/74).  
127. 
The issue was addressed under Agenda Item 9.3.5.  
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 5  — SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS OF DEVELOPING STATES  
5.1 Implementation of Article 30 of WCPFC Convention and CMM 2013-07 (SIDS special 
requirements)  
128. 
The Chair noted that para. 20 of CMM 2013-07 requires an annual review of implementation of this 
measure, and referenced WCPFC15-2018-IP01: Summary from Part 2 CMM 2013-07 paragraph 19 
annual reports (WCPFC-TCC14-2018-11) and WCPFC15-2018-DP21: Report of the European Union 
on Article 30 of the Convention and Resolution 2008-01 of WCPFC (EU).  
129. 
Japan stated it fully recognized the importance of using the checklist in CMM 2013-06 and would 
continue doing so. It also stressed that more important is direct consultation with SIDS, where common 
grounds and differing views could be identified, and gaps filled. It stated it had held a number of 
intersessional consultations with SIDS, and would continue to do so in the future, and encouraged other 
CCMs to do the same. It noted it had provided overseas development assistance for infrastructure and 
capacity development equal to US$4.1 billion over 2007–2016, which includes fisheries related projects, 
focussing on conservation and management of highly migratory species and assistance to small-scale 
fishermen. Japan noted the recent commitment by Prime Minister Abe for additional assistance related 
to human resource development, including over 5,000 people-to-people exchanges over the coming 
three years. Established in 2008, the Japan Trust Fund within WCPFC has assisted SIDS with capacity 
development for fisheries statistics and management. Japan has also provided support for SIDS through 
the Japan Promotion Fund via Overseas Fishery Cooperation Foundation of Japan (OFCF) so SIDS can 
use interest from the fund for various purposes. In November 2017 this was renewed until 2027. Japan 
expressed the hope these projects and funds would contribute to the development of SIDS.  
130. 
The United States stated that it had provided a report related to the agenda item through its Annual 
Report Part 2. Assistance includes bilateral and multilateral assistance to SIDS-related fisheries as well 
as assistance through WCPFC, such as voluntary contributions to the SRF. It noted that when looking 
 
23  
  
through the reports contained in IP01 it was hard to find detailed attachments, making accessing the 
relevant data difficult. The United States suggested that in the future it would prepare a delegation paper 
similar to WCPFC15-2018-DP21 and stated it would be happy to provide specific information to other 
CCMs on request. It also supported the provision of information on a dedicated webpage.  
131. 
The EU stated that although it prepared a report each year, it seemed that it was not being read, 
because discussions in FAC and at other times seemed to support that view. The EU suggested that in 
2019 when the Commission holds discussions in relation to application of Article 30 and related issues 
that development cooperation provided by members for SIDS directly related to WCPFC be detailed in 
the annexes prepared by the Secretariat for all members to review.  
132. 
Palau, on behalf of FFA members, stated that the Special Requirements agenda item is always a 
priority. Embedding and operationalising the provisions of Article 30 across all aspects of the 
Commission’s work requires CCMs to acknowledge and commit to responding to particular issues as 
they arise. FFA members are pleased with recent work that should provide more structure and 
responsiveness to how the Commission will support developing state CCMs in meeting their 
obligations. They directed attention to: (i) ensuring the effective participation of developing States, (ii) 
facilitating the effective participation of developing States in the work of the Commission, and (iii) 
ensuring SIDS impact assessments required by CMM 2013-06 are comprehensively developed through 
more considered and consultative approaches. They looked forward to working with other CCMs in 
progressing these issues.  
133. 
Nauru supported the comments from Palau and stated that the fact SIDS are overburdened 
contributed to difficulties in absorbing all information, and to the frustrations highlighted by the EU. 
Nauru noted this was why it was asking for SIDS support. 
5.2 Strategic Investment Plan by the FAC Special Requirements Fund Virtual Working Group.  
134. 
Dr Liz Brierley (Australia), Chair of the SRF-IWG introduced WCPFC15-2018-FAC_SRF IWG: 
Report from the Chair of the Special Requirements Fund Intersessional Working Group (SRF IWG) to 
the Finance and Administration Committee (FAC) of WCPFC. She briefly reviewed the history of the 
SRF-IWG and provided an update on the intersessional work of the SRF-IWG in 2018. The SRF-IWG 
engaged a research assistant (funded by New Zealand), who identified capacity needs of developing 
states and territories documented through WCPFC processes, and identified funding options available 
to fill these needs, both within provisions of the WCPFC and externally. The analysis demonstrated that 
most capacity development needs had associated support mechanisms. Members were asked to rank 
capacity development needs according to the priority they afforded the need from their national 
perspective. The responses were then aggregated. Some members felt that, despite access to the SRF, 
effective participation was inadequately supported by the Commission. She noted that members have 
differing views as to what effective participation means, particularly with regard to capability.  The 
Strategic Investment Plan (SIP) notes the need for flexibility to respond to the needs of individual 
countries, and for travel assistance for members to send two participants to Commission meetings. There 
is also a need for more in-country capacity building and support that does not remove people from their 
work. The SIP also documents capacity building needs documented in the TCC CMR, and WCPFC Part 
2 Annual Reports. She stated the Commission should consider whether capacity development needs 
could become public domain data in the future, noting a need for greater transparency in implementation 
of Article 30. The SIP noted that some members raised the need for a consolidated page on the WCPFC 
website to record: capacity needs (as detailed in the current SIP); funding options, eligibility and 
application processes (including references to external funding mechanisms as raised through Annual 
Part 2 reports and work of the SRF-IWG); SRF funding proposals and SRF project completion reports 
 
24  
  
for projects under US$10,000 (enhanced transparency); 2013-06 templates and assessments; and reports 
by CCMs on implementation of 2013-07.  
135. 
The SRF-IWG Chair noted the need for members to consider three (3) issues: (a) approval of the 
SIP, and thus whether the Commission would support the participation of two delegates from SIDS at 
Commission meetings; (b) making capacity needs of Part 2 Annual reports and the pCMR publicly 
available through a website dedicated to implementation of Article 30; and (c) agreement regarding 
enhanced transparency mechanisms around implementation of Article 30.  
136. 
Niue introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP26: Proposal to amend the financial regulations for the 
effective participation of SIDS, noting that FFA members remain steadfast in their resolve to ensure the 
Commission enables the effective participation of SIDS in its work. They stated that ensuring effective 
and inclusive participation for all CCMs and providing the opportunity for those who need help in doing 
so, is a priority for FFA members, and in their view is the responsibility of the Commission and all 
CCMs. Effective and inclusive participation will ensure the Commission can continue developing robust 
fisheries management arrangements that take into account all members’ needs. WCPFC15-2018-DP26 
proposes an amendment to the financial regulations to provide support for two SIDS delegates to attend 
Commission meetings but noted this was simply a starting point. They stated they were open to 
investigating different avenues, such as the funding proposals provided in the report of the SRF-IWG 
and recognised that all members needed to approach the issue with flexibility and understanding so that 
SIDS have the opportunity to build their capacity and capability to engage and participate in the 
Commission decision-making processes.  
137. 
Tuvalu, on behalf of FFA members, extended their appreciation to the SRF-IWG Chair for her 
efforts in guiding development of the SIP, which would ensure that the Commission can direct capacity 
building assistance when and where it is required. Tuvalu noted that the detail of this work would be 
considered in the FAC, but raised the following points:  
(i) 
Maintenance of the SIP is not a one-off process but requires the Commission and CCMs to 
incorporate it in various work streams to update and maintain the relevance of the SIP, in 
particular, the ongoing need to support developing States in implementing their obligations under 
the WCPFC. 
(ii) 
The SIP should be used as a basis to inform what assistance is required, where the priorities lie, 
and how these priority capacity building needs will be resourced. 
(iii) 
The need to provide support to facilitate effective participation. They stated that WCPFC15-
2018-DP26 was a starting point but recognised that some CCMs may not be comfortable with this 
approach, and stated they were open to hearing other options, and being flexible on how to 
achieve this. 
 
138. 
Tuvalu further stated that building the capability of individuals working in small fisheries 
administrations is a fundamental responsibility of the Commission, along with ensuring that the small 
fisheries administrations (which are dedicated to ensuring the Commission achieves its sustainable 
management objectives) are able to comprehend, engage and participate in, and effectively contribute 
to the work that culminates in deliberations at annual sessions, such as WCPFC15. The mechanism 
established by the Commission to do this is the SRF. Tuvalu stated the need to ensure that the SRF is 
sustainably supported by the Commission to enable it to deliver required capacity building assistance. 
Tuvalu looked forward to working with other CCMs to propel the SIP as the platform for delivering 
meaningful assistance.  
139. 
The United States requested clarification on how aspects of the proposals would be implemented. 
FSM supported the comments made by Tuvalu and agreed that the issues could be discussed in greater 
 
25  
  
detail. It suggested the need to look carefully at what information is divulged from Part 2 reports, as 
some must be kept confidential. 
140. 
The Chair observed that all members were likely able to support the principle of transparency, 
noting that the proposal was intended to support members, while acknowledging the need to understand 
what information was being made public. She confirmed the SRF-IWG Chair would develop a paper 
and the discussion on (b) and (c) (in para. 135 above) would then be resumed. On (a), she noted Tuvalu 
had referenced WCPFC15-2018-DP26, and stated that the Commission needed to look at how to fund 
effective participation, and that the FAC needed guidance as it looks at how to fund this. She observed 
that SIDS had indicated their needs, and that significant work had gone into developing the IWG 
outcomes, and that the Commission needed to look at how it would support those needs.  
141. 
Japan indicated it supported the concept of funding a second person and understood there should be 
at least two people at each meeting, but raised the need for caution, as funding two delegates would 
increase the budget, and require a larger financial contribution from CCMs. It accepted that FAC needed 
direction but stated that they could not voice support until it was known how to fund participation by 
two delegates (e.g. through increased contributions or by dropping some projects), and the associated 
fiscal and program implications had been determined.  
142. 
The Chair noted the need for general in-principle support from the Commission; following that the 
FAC could develop options and submit those back to the Commission.  
143. 
The EU observed that the issue is complex. It voiced support for helping to facilitate effective 
participation and capacity building by SIDS, but suggested that further support be integrated in the SIP, 
and separate from funding of WCPFC. It noted that the EU has other funds available to support 
development, but that funds for WCPFC are limited, and the EU’s contribution cannot always be 
increased. The EU noted that the issue was mainly development related and therefore should be 
preferentially addressed through the instruments available to fund development outside WCPFC. It also 
noted that Article 30 of the Convention refers to facilitating effective participation, not ineludibly 
ensuring effective participation, which is already in place and effective participation is not necessarily 
dependent on the number of representatives from a country; in this context, it observed that at other 
RFMOs, support was provided only for one person, and that the EU was in some cases represented by 
only one person. The EU agreed that having more representatives was a benefit, but suggested 
delegations of one could also be effective. It questioned whether additional funding would in fact 
support a third representative if a second was already in place, as SRF funds the participation of a second 
person for some developing states. It also suggested that needs varied among countries, and that for a 
lesser-developed country the situation would be different than for an emerging economy, although both 
may be SIDS. It observed that some small country delegations were relatively large and global effective 
and substantial participation of SIDS is already in place, which should be taken into account. The EU 
expressed its concern that financial contributions to WCPFC were increasing and noted that the IWG 
report presents some different options for funding participation of a second person. It suggested the need 
to set priorities, and see which countries were most in need of assistance for funding a second 
representative. 
144. 
Cook Islands voiced strong support for the position put forward by FFA members, noting the issue 
was in fact not as complex as the current discussion suggested. It stated that the Commission is a 
decision-making body, and at the heart of the Convention is ensuring the effective participation by all 
members, and that SIDS have articulated what this means to them. It thanked the IWG for its work and 
noted that it identified several critical issues: numbers; capacity to participate; and being able to attend 
and participate in all elements of Commission meetings. The Cook Islands stated the need for the 
Commission to take a decision on principle, and to agree that effective participation means two persons 
 
26  
  
for each SIDS, while leaving the options for how this could be funded to the FAC, which could 
reprioritize some funding lines, rather than necessarily increasing individual contributions. 
145. 
Niue thanked the Chair of the SRF-IWG and stated that it was one of the countries that had been 
advocating for effective participation. It agreed that the SRF was an option but stated that it posed an 
administrative burden on SIDS and the Secretariat. It supported the statement by Cook Islands and 
observed that for one person to attend from a country was ridiculous. It stated that effective participation 
required more than just support for travel, and that it was not possible to compare countries such as the 
EU and Niue. It observed that having two or three people attend Commission meetings was also part of 
its continuity and succession plan, and that it needed to be able to be prepared to engage in the working 
groups. Niue closed by emphasizing the need to have two people at the Commission meetings. 
146. 
Canada thanked the SRF-IWG Chair and noted WCPFC15-2018-DP26. It agreed this is a core 
element of the Commission’s work and noted Canada had made some small voluntary contributions. It 
expressed the concern that if the Commission agreed to the approach in DP26 (as opposed to flexible 
funding of the SRF), the result could be that two delegates are funded, in place of possibly other support 
such as funding one delegate and increasing capacity development. Canada suggested looking at funding 
SRF but retaining flexibility for how that funding is used. 
147. 
Samoa expressed thanks for the support expressed for the proposal. It noted the small size of its 
delegation, and questioned what effective participation means, suggesting it was much more than just 
being at the Commission meeting. It noted the number of working groups, and the difficulty attending 
and preparing for these, all of which have an impact on Samoa and the Pacific. It noted that the support 
being discussed was in fact itself insufficient to enable Samoa to effectively participate. Samoa noted 
the pressure SIDS face, as they lack the budget to attend the meetings, but are forced to make funds 
available to enable their attendance. It noted that SIDS are home to the fisheries resources that are being 
discussed by WCPFC. Samoa urged the Commission to fully consider the issues, and understand that 
while the proposal entailed extra expense, it would help in conserving the region’s fisheries resource 
and making these available to all. 
148. 
Nauru thanked Canada for its support on the issue and observed that the SRF was already funding 
some additional delegates, but suggested that SRF funding should be used to increase the capacity of 
SIDS’ fisheries departments; in contrast, the funding in question was not developmental, but was to 
ensure the Commission can conduct its business. It noted that as an alternative it would be possible to 
implement Rule 1 of the Rules of Procedure, which requires that the Commission has just two meetings 
per year. Nauru suggested a readiness to look at budget reallocation to find the necessary funding. 
149. 
Kiribati shared the views expressed by other SIDS, and acknowledged the assistance provided by 
developed states through the SRF and various trust funds, which have provided assistance to Kiribati. It 
lent its support to the statements of other FFA members, noting that their participation in the 
Commission meetings was vital, both as members of the Commission, and because much of the fishing 
activity in the WCPO take place in the waters of SIDS. It noted that it was very hard for SIDS to attend 
without having sufficient expertise and stated that their contribution has increased annually. Kiribati 
highlighted that its revenue from fishing constituted a basic contribution to the government’s budget, 
and stated it was happy that this issue was being considered.  
150. 
RMI supported the comments by FFA members and stressed the need to end comparisons with other 
RFMOs, given the number of WCPFC members that are SIDS for whom these issues are of great 
importance. It highlighted the number of scientific issues on the agenda, stating SIDS face challenges 
in monitoring, managing observers, and carrying out other activities, and suggested more support was 
needed. 
 
27  
  
151. 
The United States thanked the SRF-IWG and FFA members for providing DP26 and the views of 
their delegations, noting it appreciated how important the issue was to members and the Commission, 
and the broad support for the issue in principle. It noted the progress in building the SRF (to about 
US$150,000 in 2018), while appreciating the challenge of adequately supporting the SRF through 
voluntary contributions alone. It indicated their preference was to provide support through mandatory 
contributions to the SRF, with priorities then determined. The United States stated that it did want to 
see how this would affect overall contributions, which could be examined by FAC.  
152. 
The Chair thanked members for their constructive interventions, noting the increased scope and 
workload of the Commission, which had not been met with an increase in support for all members to 
participate, and which led to the formation of the SRF-IWG. She surmised that the principle is broadly 
supported and appreciated the suggestion from Cook Islands that a reprioritization of the budget could 
be needed. She noted that the issue would be forwarded to the FAC with the provision that support be 
provided, and allow FAC to consider how this could best be done, with a report back to the plenary by 
the FAC.   
153. 
Following the adoption of the Report of the FAC under Agenda item 12, and noting that this had 
considered funding to support the implementation of the Strategic Investment Plan, the Commission 
agreed to the following outcomes.   
154. 
The Commission approved the 2018 Strategic Investment Plan as a means to target investment 
to address the priority needs as identified by developing states, including effective participation. 
(Attachment F).  The Commission agreed that this Plan would be updated annually by the Secretariat 
for approval by the Commission and that the Secretariat would report to the Commission on 
implementation of the Strategic Investment Plan each year. 
155. 
The Commission agreed to make any capacity assistance needs identified in the provisional 
Compliance Monitoring Report and in Part 2 reports (as may be agreed by TCC each year to be 
contained in the Executive Summary of the Provisional Compliance Monitoring Report), public 
domain data that will inform annual updates of the Strategic Investment Plan. 
156. 
The Commission agreed to make the reports against implementation of 2013-07 (or its successor) 
contained in Part 2 Annual Reports public domain data. 
157. 
The Commission directed the Secretariat to develop a webpage dedicated to the Implementation 
of Article 30 of the Convention. The Commission considered that the publicly available website 
would include the following information: 
• 
Current and historical Strategic Investment Plans 
• 
Funding options, eligibility and application processes 
• 
Special Requirements Fund proposals and project completion reports for projects >$10,000 
• 
2013-06 template and assessments to date  
• 
Reports by CCMs on implementation of 2013-07 
 
 
 
 
28  
  
AGENDA ITEM 6  — WCPO TUNA AND BILLFISH STOCKS   
158. 
The Chair opened the session by acknowledging the contributions made by Dr John Hampton (SPC) 
to the work of the Commission, and management of tuna stocks in the region more broadly, noting that 
he would be stepping down as head of SPC’s Ocean Fisheries Programme in the coming year. She 
observed that his role was hard to summarize but stated that 2018 marked the 30th year he had attended 
an annual meeting on the status of the region’s tuna stocks, and that his sustained contribution from a 
scientific perspective was peerless. 
6.1 General Overview of Stock Status (bigeye, skipjack, SP albacore, yellowfin, Pacific bluefin, 
NP albacore and NP swordfish)  
159. 
Dr John Hampton (SPC) provided a presentation on Status of Stocks and Fisheries, which 
represented recent information on the fisheries, focusing on purse seine and longline; the status of key 
tuna species assessed by SPC (skipjack, yellowfin, bigeye, and South Pacific albacore; and some 
information on ENSO and the impacts of climate change on tuna stocks. He noted that more detailed 
information was available in WCPFC15-2018-IP12: The western and central Pacific tuna fishery: 2017 
Overview and status of stocks. He noted 2017 WCP-CA tuna catches by species as follows: (i) skipjack 
(64% of the total catch) was a drop from the highest value, recorded in 2014, and a decrease of 10% 
from 2016; (ii) yellowfin (27%) was a record catch; (iii) bigeye (5%) was the lowest since 1996; and 
(iv) albacore (4%) was a record catch. He noted that the bigeye catch was not a significant portion of 
the total catch but was important in terms of the impact on bigeye stocks.  Purse seine effort appeared 
similar to the level over the last three years. A large increase in purse seine sets on free schools 
(unassociated sets) was recorded since 2010, and a slight contraction in associated sets since 2011, 
related to implementation of the FAD closures. Many of the unassociated sets are “skunk sets”, with 
little catch recorded; once that is taken into account, the number of successful associated and 
unassociated sets is quite similar. There is significant variability in purse seine catch per unit effort 
(CPUE); FAD closures since 2009 have had a significant effect on bigeye CPUE, which is the goal. 
Overall CPUE has been reasonably consistent over time, while yellowfin CPUE has been high even 
during FAD closures.  The longline catch has seen relatively equal levels of bigeye, albacore and 
yellowfin catch, with recent decline in overall levels, but a strong increase in albacore in 2017. There 
are 2 components to the longline fishery: (i) the tropical longline fishery (20°N–10°S), with catches of 
bigeye and yellowfin, which recorded reasonably stable catch and effort over the last 10 years. Declines 
in catch and effort in 2017 may be an artefact of incomplete reporting; CPUE for both species spiked in 
2014–2015, but has since returned to more normal levels; and (ii) the southern longline fishery, targeting 
South Pacific albacore, where catch and effort increased significantly in 2017; CPUE has declined over 
the long term, but has shown a small increase since 2011.  
160. 
He provided an overview of stock status, noting that spawning biomass depletion was the metric for 
denoting stock status, and that there had been a long-term declining trend for all species. Three stocks 
are not near the 20% LRP, while yellowfin is starting to approach that LRP, which would need to be 
examined in future years; skipjack is trending close to the 50% interim TRP.  Regarding the El Niño-
Southern Oscillation (ENSO), he noted that the indicators suggest we are currently in a weak El Nino 
phase, and the median of the NOAA forecast models suggests that this is likely to continue through at 
least the first half of 2019. Projected climate change impacts show substantial declines predicted for 
skipjack as the 21st century progresses, and more modest declines for yellowfin and bigeye. South 
Pacific albacore is actually projected to increase, but with the caveat that there is very large uncertainty 
in these projections. 
161. 
 In response to an inquiry from PNG regarding the increase in the number of skunk sets SPC stated 
it may be related to unassociated sets made by vessels in response to the FAD closures in effect since 
 
29  
  
2009 that were made in the absence of much experience in making such sets; he suggested the number 
of skunk sets may decrease as vessels gain experience. 
162. 
Australia, on behalf of other FFA members, echoed the sentiments expressed by the Chair in relation 
to the enormous contribution of Dr John Hampton to the Commission and FFA members over many 
decades, and expressed their thanks. With respect to the presentation, they stated their understanding 
that the overview was for information but stated that FFA members wanted to draw attention to a number 
of larger issues raised in the report. These include the fact that the work of the Commission had been 
focused on bigeye tuna for several years, while currently the tropical tuna stock of most concern was 
yellowfin, meaning the Commission would need to broaden its focus. They stated that new work would 
likely need to be focused on better quantifying the catch of small yellowfin in the far west of the WCPFC 
Convention Area. They welcomed continuation of the WPEA project, and noted the work in progress 
on reducing uncertainty regarding yellowfin growth.  They stated that as long as there were major 
uncertainties about the status of tropical tuna stocks important to WCPFC CCMs, there could be no 
weakening of the tropical tuna measure. 
163. 
Samoa, on behalf of FFA members, stated their concern over the South Pacific albacore stock status, 
and stated that the longline vulnerable albacore biomass is critical to the fishery.  
164. 
The EU noted the value of the presentation on climate impacts despite the large uncertainty of the 
results. It stated that although all key tuna stocks were within safe biological limits, some other species 
were assessed with a different conservation status, and suggested that the presentation could include 
other WCPFC species (e.g., North Pacific bluefin tuna, North Pacific striped marlin), which would 
ensure that all species raising conservation concerns are adequately considered by the Commission. In 
response to a query from the EU regarding a decreasing trend in purse seine effort, SPC stated that the 
reduction was real (not an artefact of the data), and suggested the US treaty and departure of some fleets 
from fishery likely had an impact.  
165. 
Indonesia asked what factors were driving the increase in South Pacific albacore effort. SPC replied 
there was some increase in fishing effort by the Chinese fleet, as well as an increase to the far east of 
the convention area, and around Vanuatu and Solomon Islands; much of the increase was in the high 
seas, with a spike in effort south of 10°S.   
166. 
China inquired about the portion of the South Pacific albacore catch taken by the troll fishery, and 
whether SPC conducted the assessment for South Pacific albacore in conjunction with IATTC staff. 
SPC noted that chartering arrangements had altered over the previous 3 years, and that detailed 
information was presented in WCPFC15-2018-IP02: Trends in the south Pacific albacore longline and 
troll fisheries. The troll fishery accounts for a catch of some 2,000–3,000mt of albacore per year, much 
of this around New Zealand; the fish are usually 1–3 years old. Regarding cooperation with IATTC, 
SPC noted that the last few assessments had been restricted to the WCPFC Convention Area, including 
the overlap area, but not farther east. SPC stated this was done to provide more targeted advice to the 
Commission, but that it may be worth doing a Pacific-wide stock assessment, especially because IATTC 
indicates catches in the EPO may have increased in the last few years. 
167. 
Chinese Taipei noted the climate change impacts on tuna stocks, which projected three species 
would be negatively impacted, while south Pacific albacore could be positively impacted, and asked 
about the impact of climate change on tuna migration patterns. SPC stated changes in stocks were a 
response to weakening of upwelling and currents that take that upwelling to the WPO, with a resulting 
displacement of stocks to the east. SPC noted there could be some increase (or greater stability) of 
bigeye, yellowfin and skipjack stocks in the EPO. South Pacific albacore are displaced somewhat to the 
south, and climate change impacts at 10°–30° S differ from those in equatorial waters, which is reflected 
 
30  
  
by the projected positive impact on these stocks. It noted there was large uncertainty in the climate 
change models with respect to changes in dissolved oxygen levels, to which South Pacific albacore are 
sensitive, and stressed that the projected 50% increase should not be considered reliable at present, 
noting the need for better resolution of the dissolved oxygen parameter. 
168. 
In response to a query from New Zealand regarding trends in CPUE in the longline catch, SPC 
stated that yellowfin was a particularly important component in the southern longline fishery, and that 
it would need to look at this in the stock assessments. It noted that CPUE was relatively low in those 
areas, and that there were no striking differences in trends over time. SPC indicated it would examine 
the issue and report back to New Zealand.   
169. 
Dr Shuya Nakatsuka (Japan), Vice-Chair of the Pacific bluefin tuna working group reviewed the 
status of Pacific bluefin tuna on behalf of the ISC, which is the science provider to the NC, and provided 
advice to SC. As the 2018 assessment was an update, the basic model construction was the same as that 
used for the 2016 assessment. Population dynamics were estimated using a fully integrated age-
structured model (Stock Synthesis v. 3) fitted to catch, size-composition and CPUE data from 1952 to 
2016 (fishing year). Life history parameters included a length-at-age relationship from otolith-derived 
ages, as well as natural mortality estimates from a tag-recapture study and empirical-life history 
methods. Nineteen fleets were defined for use in the stock assessment model based on a 
country/gear/season/region stratification. Quarterly observations of catch and size compositions, when 
available, were used as inputs to the model to describe the removal processes. Annual estimates of 
standardized CPUE from the Japanese longline fleets, the Chinese Taipei longline fleets, and the 
Japanese troll fleets were used as measures of the relative abundance of the population. Based on the 
diagnostic analyses, the ISC concluded that the model represents the data sufficiently and results were 
consistent with the 2016 assessment. He noted that ISC had previously assessed the stock to be at a 
historically low level, but that it was now gradually increasing, with a positive recruitment trend for the 
last 2 years. Fishing mortality is declining, presumably because of recently adopted conservation 
measures. The stock status assessment concluded overfishing is occurring and the stock is in an 
overfished condition based on commonly used reference points. The harvest strategy HS-02 (Harvest 
Strategy for Pacific Bluefin Tuna Fisheries) uses the low recruitment scenario until the initial rebuilding 
target is achieved and average recruitment thereafter, and it has been confirmed that the recent 10-year 
recruitment is better than that from the low recruitment period (1980–1989). The status quo projection 
resulted in a 98% probability of achieving the rebuilding target. In summary, the projection results 
indicate that the initial rebuilding target will be achieved. The 2018 results are more optimistic because 
of recent good recruitment. In its advice to the Commission, SC14 noted “the current very low level of 
spawning biomass (3.3% B0), the current level of overfishing, and that the projections are strongly 
influenced by the inclusion of a relatively high but uncertain recruitment in 2016. The majority of CCMs 
recommended a precautionary approach to the management of Pacific bluefin tuna, especially in relation 
to the timing of increasing catch levels, until the rebuilding of the stock to higher biomass levels is 
achieved.” (SC14 Summary Report, para 266).  
170. 
S. Nakatsuka further stated the North Pacific swordfish 2018 assessment used an integrated model, 
and stock status was relatively good, with projections undertaken in various scenarios; SC noted the 
results. For North Pacific albacore no assessment was done in 2018 (the last was in 2017), and SC advice 
from SC13 is current.  
171. 
New Zealand, on behalf of FFA members, stated it was aware of discussions regarding potential 
increases in catch limits. While very supportive of the harvest strategy approach, it stated it was also 
aware of the need for a precautionary approach and stated that catch increases should be considered only 
after continued positive developments. 
 
31  
  
172. 
The EU welcomed the update on the Pacific bluefin tuna stocks, and the more positive outlook, 
while reminding members that the first rebuilding target was well below any biological reference points 
adopted for other stocks, and that there was a long way to go in rebuilding the stock. It inquired how 
uncertainty was addressed for Pacific bluefin tuna, in comparison to approaches used by SPC for tropical 
tuna species. In reply, the presenter stated that uncertainty is accounted for through variability in terms 
of catch rate and CPUE, and by using historical recruitment levels; in the initial rebuilding period the 
low recruitment period is used. Steepness is high but does not affect the future recruitment level in the 
projection. Japan noted that the approach taken by ISC for Pacific bluefin tuna was highly precautionary 
as the low recruitment period used (from the 1980s) was below recent recruitment. The presenter stated 
that SPC provides projections based both on recent recruitment and low recruitment levels for tropical 
tunas. That used for Pacific bluefin tuna was 30% lower than an average level, and thus assumes a 
recruitment reduction of 30%. The EU noted the need to keep in mind that tropical tuna species are 
50%–100% above maximum sustainable yield levels, while Pacific bluefin is a depleted stock, and thus 
the management response needs to be proportionate.  
6.2 South Pacific Albacore   
173. 
The Commission was provided with WCPFC15-2018-08: Reference document for the review of 
CMM 2015-02 and development of harvest strategies under CMM 2014-06 (south Pacific albacore 
tuna).  
6.2.1 
Roadmap for effective conservation and management of South Pacific albacore  
174. 
The Chair of the SPA-VIWG introduced WCPFC15-2018-SPalbroadmap:  Intersessional activity 
report from the South Pacific albacore roadmap virtual working group, and noted that WCPFC14 
adopted terms of reference (TORs) for a South Pacific albacore working group. She noted that a formal 
review of the measure was not needed because issues with the CMM were well documented. She stated 
that WCPFC15-2018-SPalbroadmap_suppl: South Pacific Albacore Roadmap Previous SC, TCC, 
and Commission Discussions Regarding CMMs 2010-05 and 2015-02 compiled all comments since 
about 2010. A workplan was included as attachment 3 to WCPFC15-2018-SPalbroadmap and 
developing it would be the task for the SPA-VIWG over the next months. She stated that it was 
envisioned that a limit on the overall fishery should be in place as the harvest strategy was developed, 
with a TRP in place. The workplan contains three workstreams: the harvest strategy, addressing 
monitoring and reporting gaps, and establishing limits for the fishery. She also referenced WCPFC15-
2018-09: Technical aspects of a potential south Pacific albacore harvest strategy (prepared by SPC) 
and noted that SC14 had recommended that WCPFC15 use the working paper to inform the 
development of the roadmap, and SC14 requested guidance from the Commission on the fisheries to be 
included, and the potential management control measures for that fishery. 
175. 
 Vanuatu thanked New Zealand for leading the intersessional process, and stated it was glad to see 
agreement on the need for TRPs. It noted WCPFC14 agreed on the need to set a TRP at WCPFC15. 
176. 
China also thanked New Zealand and inquired whether the harvest control rule to be adopted by 
2021 should also include a harvest allocation. It suggested that the Commission advises SPC that all 
fisheries should be controlled by a harvest control rule. 
177. 
The EU stated in reference to WCPFC15-2018-09 that the focus on the WCPO (as opposed to the 
entire Pacific stock as is done in the North Pacific albacore stock assessment) could negatively impact 
the harvest strategy, observing there was a significant increase in albacore catch in the EPO (25,000 
tons in recent years). It also raised the issue of the overlap area between the WCPFC and IATTC, where 
members can make their own decisions about how their catches are allocated. The EU spoke about 
 
32  
  
empirical and model-based approaches, and suggested these could be useful when used in conjunction, 
and asked whether current levels of longline observer coverage could impact the development of the 
proposed harvest strategy. New Zealand stated that the SPA-VIWG would not address which stocks 
were covered by the stock assessment, but acknowledged the concern, and that SC14 recommended 
both approaches be used. Observer coverage will help with data, and be beneficial in the long term, but 
how to do this remains a question. SPC stated that it formerly did a South Pacific-wide assessment, but 
then focused on the Convention area to tailor its specific evaluations. SPC noted the overlap area was 
included in the assessment. It stated that it could develop an estimate of implementation error using 
observer data from the Fiji fleet, where observer coverage is relatively good.  
178. 
China stated that it was premature to adopt an Electronic Reporting standard for South Pacific 
albacore at WCPFC15 and hoped that Electronic Reporting could be addressed at WCPFC16 in 
conjunction with a focus on transhipment. 
179. 
The United States thanked New Zealand for spearheading the roadmap for South Pacific albacore.  It 
stated it was very concerned about the management of the fishery, as it is an important backbone to 
many island economies. It stated much work remained to be done to progress discussion on catch limits 
and allocation schemes and looked forward to continuing to participate in the IWG to move the roadmap 
process forward. The United States hoped the process can lead to economically viable fisheries, 
particularly for its longline fleet in American Samoa and its troll fishery. 
180. 
The Chair noted the need for a roadmap workplan at WCPFC16 and suggested the SPA-VIWG 
could reconvene later in 2019 to discuss SC15 and TCC15 outcomes. She noted the United States had 
suggested a focus on longline catch and effort while retaining some flexibility.  
181. 
Cook Islands, on behalf of FFA members, stated that the management control rule that FFA 
members were likely to ask SPC to test in the Management Strategy Evaluation (MSE) for the Harvest 
Control Rule is catch, although they noted this would be locally translated into national management 
control quantities for those FFA members that already use effort or other management controls on 
albacore fishing in their own jurisdictions. FFA would likely recommend to SPC that all fishing gears 
taking South Pacific albacore should be included as fisheries in the MSE, including the southern 
albacore troll fishery, while noting that future management action should be commensurate with the 
impact different gear types have on the stock.  They noted FFA members’ discussions were preliminary, 
with no decisions as of yet, and stated that as already agreed, WCPFC15 would adopt a TRP and then 
work would proceed in the Commission on determining catch and/or effort limits that will help us move 
towards the target.   
182. 
WCPFC15 tasked the SPA-VIWG, Chaired by New Zealand, to continue work intersessionally 
to develop the Roadmap for Effective Conservation and Management of South Pacific Albacore.  
 
6.2.2 
Target reference point  
183. 
The Commission considered WCPFC15-2018-10_rev1: Potential target reference points for south 
Pacific albacore (prepared by SPC). Fiji, on behalf of FFA members, introduced WCPFC15-2018-
DP10: Proposal for establishing a target reference point for south Pacific albacore, reminding 
members that WCPFC made a binding decision to adopt a TRP for South Pacific albacore at WCPFC15. 
They noted that each year FFA members gave a lengthy explanation of their TRP proposal, trying to 
anticipate and answer all questions, but that for every question they answer, a new question is raised, 
usually one that was answered the previous year. They posed the following question of other CCMs: 
 
33  
  
“What do you expect will be the likely result of taking no effective management action, and what impact 
this will have on South Pacific SIDS?”, stating that members likely know the answer, and FFA members 
are not prepared to let this happen. They noted their proposal was based on the best scientific advice 
and sought to start the Commission on the path towards effectively managing the stock in a way that 
would provide economic benefits to all participants. They thanked the CCMs that had engaged with 
them on the proposal and looked forward to the cooperation of all WCPFC members to ensure it is 
passed by WCPFC15.  
184. 
China thanked FFA for the proposal, noting it had conducted bilateral discussions with FFA prior 
to WCPFC15. It noted that it supported the consensus at WCPFC14 to adopt a TRP, but stated FFA was 
now proposing a TRP based on 45% spawning biomass in the absence of fishing, and changing the 
concept through a focus on CPUE, and limiting the TRP to longline fisheries that target South Pacific 
albacore. China stated it would pursue the issue through bilateral contacts with FFA and would seek to 
reach a common understanding.  
185. 
The Pacific Islands Tuna Industry Association (PITIA), on behalf of its members in the South 
Pacific albacore longline fishery, expressed deep concern that the WCPFC continues to fail in its 
mandate to respond effectively to dire conditions in the WCPO South Pacific albacore fishery.  It 
strongly encouraged WCPFC15 to come to agreement on the harvest strategy elements they committed 
to under the Harvest Strategy Workplan CMM 2014-06, including establishing a TRP and developing a 
Harvest Control Rule for South Pacific albacore. It stated that the most recent stock assessment for 
South Pacific albacore supports the conclusion that the southern albacore stock is not overfished or 
experiencing overfishing, but the fishery is in a perilous state.  Catch rates simply cannot support current 
costs, leaving many companies on the brink of financial failure. It stated it is fortunate that the southern 
albacore stocks are biologically healthy, but the key to economic viability of a fishery is CPUE.  It 
indicated it has observed a continually declining CPUE over several years, diminishing what was once 
a robust and attractive fishery to a shadow of itself, and said that the inability of the WCPFC to control 
a massive increase in high seas fishing effort is a sad indictment about this Commission’s ability to 
manage the fisheries under its charge. It stated WCPFC must take heed of the management advice and 
implications contained in recommendations from SC10 to SC14, noting the critical importance of the 
fishery for the fishing industry, their communities, their people and their livelihoods and well-being. 
PITIA strongly urged the WCPFC 15 to make a decision to ensure the long-term commercial viability 
and sustainability of the southern longline fishery. 
186. 
Chinese Taipei thanked FFA and noted confusion over the figures. It stated its understanding that a 
TRP is a starting point, and that when a TRP is adopted the Commission would not take immediate 
action to reduce effort, but stated the need to know what the impact on effort would be in the future.  
Chinese Taipei stated that South Pacific albacore has a healthy status.  It needed more time to understand 
a change to a CPUE-based TRP, and noted that such a change (as in WCPFC15-2018-10_rev1 and 
DP10) shall be reviewed by SC. Chinese Taipei also expressed that it would strive to work with other 
CCMs as there was agreement by CCMs last year to progress this matter this year. 
187. 
Cook Islands, on behalf of FFA members, stated they envisage a bright future for distant water 
vessels partnering with FFA members to sustainably fish for South Pacific albacore in their EEZs, and 
also for developing their own domestic fleets, but stated all those vessels need to be able to catch enough 
fish to be profitable. They noted the absence of any benefit in a fishery that makes no profit, makes a 
profit only two years out of five, or requires long-term government funding and subsidisation to stay 
afloat. They stated that the only way that fishery managers can promote profitability is to manage the 
stock at a level that maintains good catch rates. South Pacific albacore is assessed as a healthy stock 
because the stock assessment shows that the total biomass is high, which may be accurate, but the 
longline fishery does not fish the total biomass, but rather large adult fish, what the SPC calls the 
 
34  
  
“vulnerable biomass”. There are far fewer fish in the vulnerable biomass than there are in the total 
biomass. So, as explained in DP10, FFA members propose that the Commission agree on a TRP that 
will restore and maintain the vulnerable biomass of the stock at 17% above its 2013 level in order to 
ensure economically viable catch rates in the future. This will set the stage for future work in the 
Commission, including the setting of limits that will apply in EEZs and in the high seas and the 
agreement of harvest control rules. They encouraged engagement from other CCMs on their proposal 
and stated that FFA members were not willing to leave WCPFC15 without agreement on a meaningful 
TRP for South Pacific albacore that will provide the basis for effective management of the stock by the 
WCPFC and ensure the economic viability of their fisheries for this important species.  
188. 
The United States voiced support for a TRP for South Pacific albacore that ensures the profitability 
of Pacific Island fishing fleets, and tentatively supported FFA’s proposal. It noted it was very much in 
favour of adopting a TRP, but argued that this should be done through the harvest strategies, and not 
through CMMs, which are for binding actions on individual members. 
189. 
Samoa suggested there are benefits for all with the TRP, stating that if all fish were caught now, no 
fish will be left for the future, including for distant water fishing nations’ future operations. Samoa noted 
that SIDS’ fisheries are not subsidized, and stated the need to ensure continuity of fishing.  
190. 
American Samoa stated that the US market for canned albacore is the largest globally, and the 
American Samoa canneries are one of the major sources of canned albacore. It stated that American 
Samoa’s domestic longline fishery is almost entirely dependent on the South Pacific albacore stock, and 
has gone through great changes in the last ten years. In the early to mid-2000s, the fishery was profitable. 
In 2014, the economics of the fishery were so bad that it was better to tie up vessels in the fleet than to 
go fishing. Similar conditions were experienced in 2016 then, on average, every hook deployed by the 
fleet lost money. Several neighbouring domestic longline fleets have suffered similar economic 
conditions. It expressed the hope that WCPFC15 can adopt a TRP for South Pacific albacore that will 
lead to catch rates that restore profitability to domestic fisheries while maintaining adequate sources of 
albacore for processing, recognizing the importance of related impacts and vulnerabilities under Article 
30 of the Convention. American Samoa looked forward to cooperating with other CCMs to address 
these important issues.  
191. 
French Polynesia stated that it supported adoption of a TRP, which it sees as a first step to 
development of a harvest strategy. 
192. 
China observed that in 2016 the Commission adopted a TRP for skipjack based on biomass in the 
absence of fishing. It stated that in its view a consistent approach should be taken in setting stock TRPs, 
and that they were confused regarding the suggested CPUE-based TRP for South Pacific albacore.  
193. 
Vanuatu, on behalf of FFA members, stated that South Pacific albacore is the foundation of domestic 
longline fishery operations in many FFA member countries and many SIDS are taking steps to improve 
the management of the fishery within their own waters including through MSC certification. A target 
reference point for South Pacific albacore is a key first step in the development of harvest control rules, 
and without progress in this area MSC certification will lapse. This is yet another reason why the 
Commission needs to follow through on its management commitments this year and agree to the FFA’s 
TRP proposal. 
194. 
Tonga stated that like other FFA member countries, South Pacific albacore is very important to 
Tonga. It noted that fish is its primary resource. It reflected on the development of Tonga’s fishing 
industry and contrasted the current risk of overfishing the Southern albacore stock. It highlighted the 
high seas IUU fishing adjacent to its waters, and the impacts of climate change, and stressed the 
 
35  
  
importance for sustainable management of these fisheries. It supported the proposal by FFA member 
countries, which they stated represents the best way to manage this resource, and stressed the importance 
of having a TRP approved by WCPFC15, which was being requested by 16 WCPFC members. Tonga 
sought the support of all member countries attending the meeting to ensure that the South Pacific 
albacore resource is managed sustainably.  
195. 
EU stated that it is not directly involved in the fishery and could support the principle of a TRP that 
is based, in part, on economic factors. It expressed doubts about basing it solely on CPUE, but voiced 
support for the effort in principle. EU noted that SIDS were asking others to reduce their level of fishing 
effort to enable the fishing effort of SIDS. It acknowledged that some States are more vulnerable but 
there is also a socioeconomic impact on those who must reduce their effort. In the UN FSA, countries 
involved must cooperate. EU invited all those involved in the fishery to make a sacrifice. 
196. 
New Caledonia stated that it is very dependent on South Pacific albacore, which accounts for 65% 
of their catch. It stated it has good catch rates in their EEZ, but that its fleet is suffering from the huge 
fishing effort in the high seas pockets around its EEZ. New Caledonia supported making progress on 
the issue. 
197. 
Tuvalu supported other FFA members, noting that a CPUE-based approach has been proposed 
because this is what determines profit; it also noted that spawning biomass estimates are not as robust 
for this species as for other species. Tuvalu stated that the discussion was limited to a TRP, and that a 
later process would address catch levels. 
198. 
Niue supported comments from FFA members and encouraged members to consider WCPFC15-
2018-10_rev1, and consult with SPC.  
199. 
Following further consultation, the SWG Chair (Fiji) thanked all CCMs for agreeing on a TRP 
number, which would be an interim TRP.  The SWG Chair acknowledged that FFA members had to 
give up a lot, but did so in the interest of moving forward and agreeing on a TRP. He stated this had 
been discussed for many years, and thanked the FFA Secretariat, SPC, and all delegations for their 
understanding and cooperation. 
200. 
China stated that the 56% TRP for South Pacific albacore was a proposal from FFA, and in 
consideration to the wishes of FFA and the difficulty that the Chinese tuna industry has to face in the 
future, if there was consensus amongst other Members to adopt the proposed TRP, China would not 
block adoption of the TRP. 
201. 
Japan thanked the SWG Chair and supported the proposed language. It stated that Japan catches a 
very small amount of South Pacific albacore but that it was active in the discussions because it 
understands the economic difficulties fishermen in FFA members face. It noted that WCPFC16 would 
look at skipjack, and that Japanese fishermen are facing economic problems because of changed 
migration patterns of skipjack. Japan hoped these considerations could be extended to the discussion on 
skipjack to be held in 2019. 
202. 
Samoa, on behalf of FFA, felt very encouraged after the discussions with China and Japan. FFA 
and ministerial colleagues appreciated the support and concessions and thanked the EU and the United 
States for their support. They noted that at the ongoing climate change negotiations in Poland (COP 24), 
their Prime Minister spoke about the ocean and the need to preserve our resources, now and for the 
future, and stated that the obligations made today would go a long way to conserving our resources for 
the future. They thanked delegates, the WCPFC Secretariat, and the SWG Chair.  
 
36  
  
203. 
Chinese Taipei thanked CCMs and noted that South Pacific albacore is a very important resource 
to their industry as well. It stated that it understood the importance of this step and said all CCMs must 
share the burden, which would require sacrifice on their part. Chinese Taipei expressed that it will not 
join the consensus, but it has no intention to block the adoption of the TRP, noting that there was 
consensus amongst other Members. 
204. 
The Cook Islands thanked everyone for their hard work and stated that the stock could now be 
managed for the benefit of everyone, which sends a positive signal to the industry and to Pacific peoples.  
205. 
EU welcomed the compromise achieved. It noted there was a mention that there may be a need for 
stronger cooperation between the WCPFC and IATTC in relation to managing or working together for 
global assessment of South Pacific albacore in the EPO and WCPO.  
206. 
The Chair reflected that the outcome reflected what was possible when all members cooperate, even 
if they all do not agree. She noted that the TRP for South Pacific albacore would be recorded in the 
harvest strategy section of the Commission webpage, not as a CMM. 
207. 
WCPFC15 agreed on an interim target reference point (TRP) for south Pacific albacore at 56 
percent of spawning stock biomass in the absence of fishing (0.56 SBF=0)1  with the objective of 
achieving an 8 percent increase in catch per unit of effort (CPUE) for the southern longline fishery as 
compared to 2013 levels.2 If a future stock assessment indicates that this interim TRP will not result 
in the desired longline CPUE, then the interim TRP will be revised in order to meet this objective. 
The TRP shall be reviewed every 3 years, consistent with the SP albacore assessment schedule.  
208. 
The Commission shall amend or develop appropriate conservation and management measures to 
implement a harvest control rule, developed in accordance with CMM 2014-06, with the objective of 
maintaining the south Pacific albacore spawning stock biomass at the target level on average and 
according to the timeframes specified in paragraph 209.  
209. 
In order to manage the required reduction in catches, the timeline for achieving the interim target 
reference point shall be no later than 20 years. The Scientific Services Provider is tasked with 
identifying a range of alternative catch pathways and timeframes that achieve this, for consideration 
in 2019.  
210. 
In undertaking the assessment identified in paragraph 209 information from all fisheries will be 
included while noting that any management measures must take account of the impact of different 
gear types.  
211. 
The Scientific Committee shall refer to the target reference point in its assessment of the status 
of the WCPO South Pacific albacore tuna stock and in reporting to the Commission on management 
advice and implications for this stock.  
212. 
Considering that the distribution of the South Pacific albacore stock goes beyond the WCPFC 
Convention area and the management of this stock is responsibility of both WCPFC and IATTC, 
WCPFC15 requested the Scientific Services Provider to coordinate with the IATTC scientific staff 
with the view to consider including the entire South Pacific in future assessments. 
                                                      
1 The method to be used in estimating the recent average spawning biomass in the absence of fishing shall be the same 
as that adopted by the Commission for the limit reference point, as described in paragraph 3 of CMM 2015-06. 
2 The proxy for CPUE will be the southern longline vulnerable biomass as estimated within the stock assessment. 
 
37  
  
6.2.3 
Harvest control rules  
213. 
The Chair noted that the issue would be addressed through the future development of the workplan 
for the Roadmap for Effective Conservation and Management of South Pacific Albacore (Agenda Item 
6.2.1). 
6.2.4 
Management strategy evaluation   
214. 
The Chair noted that the issue would be addressed through the future development of the workplan 
for the Roadmap for Effective Conservation and Management of South Pacific Albacore (Agenda Item 
6.2.1). 
6.2.5 
Review of CMM 2015-02 (SP albacore)  
215. 
Two papers were prepared relevant to this agenda item: WCPFC15-2018-IP03: Summary of CCM 
reporting under south Pacific albacore CMMs (Secretariat and SPC), and WCPFC15-2018-IP04_rev1: 
An assessment of the number of vessels fishing for south Pacific albacore south of 20°S (SPC). There 
was no discussion under this agenda item.  
6.3 Bigeye, Skipjack and Yellowfin  
216. 
SPC introduced WCPFC15-2018-12_rev2: Evaluation of CMM 2017-01 for bigeye tuna, with 
additional evaluations for skipjack and yellowfin tuna. The 2018 Harvest Strategy work plan, as updated 
by WCPFC14, requested that “SC and SPC provide advice to the Commission on the likely outcomes 
of the revised tropical tuna measure” (CMM 2017-01) against its aim for bigeye that “the spawning 
biomass depletion ratio (SB/SBF=0) be maintained at or above the average SB/SBF=0 for 2012-2015”. 
SPC used the same detailed evaluation approach as used within previous tropical tuna CMM 
evaluations. Assumptions are made regarding the impact that changes to the FAD closure period and/or 
high seas effort limits will have on FAD-related effort, and the potential future catches of longline fleets. 
Under these assumptions, three scenarios of future purse seine effort and longline catch are defined: (i) 
‘status quo’ (2013–2015 average fishing levels); (ii) ‘optimistic’ (e.g. CCMs with longline limits take 
their 2017 catch limit or 2013–2015 average level if lower); and (iii) ‘pessimistic’ (every CCM fishes 
the maximum allowed under the Measure).  
217. 
Stochastic bigeye stock projections were used to evaluate potential long-term consequences of 
resulting future fishing levels under each scenario, in comparison to status quo conditions (2013–2015 
average), across the 2017 bigeye assessment grid incorporating updated growth information, weighted 
as defined by SC13 for management advice. SPC noted that the results were strongly influenced by the 
assumed future recruitment levels. If recent positive recruitments continue into the future, all scenarios 
examined achieve the aims of the CMM, in that median spawning biomass is projected to increase 
relative to recent levels, and median fishing mortality is projected to decline (exception being the 
pessimistic CMM scenario, although fishing mortality remains below FMSY). If less optimistic longer-
term recruitments continue into the future, spawning biomass depletion worsens relative to recent levels 
under all scenarios, and the future risk of spawning biomass falling below the limit reference point 
(LRP) increases to 24%–40%, dependent on the scenario. In turn, all three future fishing scenarios imply 
notable increases in fishing mortality under those recruitment conditions, to median levels well above 
FMSY. 
218. 
The analysis for skipjack and yellowfin was consistent with that for bigeye and made the following 
assumptions: overall purse seine effort is constant at the 2013–2015 average level; yellowfin longline 
catch is consistent with that assumed for bigeye, and skipjack longline catch is negligible. Long term 
 
38  
  
recruitment is assumed. For skipjack, all scenarios result in SB/SBF=0 of .47, with 0% chance of being 
below the TRP. For yellowfin  SB/SBF=0 is .33 for the 2013–2015 average and optimistic scenarios (with 
a 7% risk of breaching the LRP); SB/SBF=0 is .30 for the  pessimistic scenario, with a 16% risk of 
breaching the LRP. With respect to whether the CMM will achieve its objective skipjack: reasonably 
(SB/SBF=0 ~0.47), while yellowfin is marginal, given risk, and notably not under the pessimistic scenario 
(8% reduction in SB/SBF=0 from recent levels, 16% risk of breaching the LRP). 
219. 
  In response to a query from Korea, SPC clarified that 2012-2015 was used in calculating SB/SBF=0, 
while comparisons were based on the 2013-2015 period.  
220. 
Solomon Islands, on behalf of the PNA, thanked SPC for the excellent work and for including 
skipjack and yellowfin in WCPFC15-2018-12_rev 2. They stated that given the latest stock 
assessments, there was no longer a need to focus solely on bigeye and so having information available 
on all three species is vital, and the main messages that PNA take from the projections are: 
• 
For bigeye, the measure is likely to achieve its objectives of stable spawning biomass, but there is 
certainly no room for increases in bigeye catch or effort. 
• 
For yellowfin, the results are far less positive, and spawning biomass is likely to fall below recent 
levels in the long term.  Of even greater concern is the introduction of reasonably high levels of risk 
that the stock will actually fall below the limit reference point. 
• 
For skipjack, the projections show that spawning biomass in 2045 will likely be marginally less than 
the target reference point. 
Solomon Islands surmised that the yellowfin and skipjack messages are concerning to PNA as these are 
the mainstays of PNA economies.  They noted PNA countries would need time to explore the full 
implications, including the new skipjack assessment in 2019, but that at present the projections in 
combination provided irrefutable support for the FFA position in WCPFC15-2018-DP08 that any 
weakening of CMM 2017-01 would be inconsistent with the objectives of that measure and the 
precautionary approach. 
 
221. 
Indonesia referenced the tables in Appendix 1 of WCPFC15-2018-12_rev 2 that relate to the 
estimation of the optimistic and pessimistic scenarios and inquired how decisions were made regarding 
these scenarios. It noted that Indonesia was making these comments in light of its views on bigeye tuna 
longline catch limits, as set forth in WCPFC15-2018-DP29: Indonesia’s bigeye tuna catch limits in 
longline fisheries.  
222. 
The EU stated its understanding that the pessimistic scenario assumed that bigeye catch was 
maintained at a high level although biomass is decreasing, resulting in a very high level of effort, and 
questioned whether this was realistic. In response, SPC confirmed that the assumption that catch levels 
were maintained in the future (over the long term) was likely to result in overly high fishing mortality 
estimates. The EU also noted it would be desirable to present in the tables the outcome of projections 
over shorter time periods, as was done at SC and that in the future short-term projections are used instead 
or at least in addition to the long term ones, since the fisheries concerned are assessed quasi-every three 
years. Regarding management objectives and follow-up on recommendations of SC, the EU stated that 
in CMM 2017-01 the management objectives in the CMM were based on SC13 advice, which was 
precautionary because of uncertainty regarding the growth curve. SC14 adopted the growth curve, but 
advice from SC14 remains the same as it was in 2017 from SC13. EU indicated it would like a rationale 
for that advice from SC, and would like advice to be more explicit, including when possible different 
options for the Commission to consider.  
 
39  
  
223. 
Japan inquired regarding skipjack, and the future projection for 2045, which projects SB2045/SBf=0 
will be 47%, or close to 50%. It noted that if the goal is to maintain the ratio at 50%, this result is close, 
but inquired what the threshold would be at which it could be considered that the spawning biomass 
was being maintained “at around 50%”. Japan noted that depending on the specifics, the Commission 
would likely want to recommend some deviation centred around 50% and asked how great that would 
be. SPC agreed there was a need to develop a definition of what “around an average” means (how close 
over time?). Japan stated this would have to be discussed under the harvest strategy.  
224. 
Indonesia inquired whether TRP or LRP was the most important for determining the health of the 
bigeye stock. SPC noted this would be addressed in the discussion on TRPs. 
 
6.3.1 
Review of CMM 2017-01 (bigeye, skipjack, yellowfin)  
225. 
The Chair noted that a number of reference documents were prepared for WCPFC15, including 
WCPFC15-2018-11: Reference document for the review of CMM 2017-01 and development of harvest 
strategies under CMM 2014-06 (bigeye, yellowfin and skipjack tuna); WCPFC15-2018-IP05: 
Summary of the reports received under tropical tuna CMMs - from 2017 to 2018 (update of TCC14-
IP07); WCPFC15-2018-IP06: Catch and effort tables on tropical tuna CMMs - prepared by SPC-OFP 
(update of TCC14-IP08); and WCPFC15-2018-IP11: Summary of Notifications to WCPFC of Charter, 
Lease or other mechanisms.  The Report of the FAD Management Options Intersessional Working 
Group (WCPFC15-2018-FADMO-IWG) and the various delegation proposals were noted to be 
relevant to the discussions and were considered by the tropical tuna CMM SWG.  She noted that CMM 
2017-01 had five provisions that were expiring in 2018. One, relating to the Cook Islands did not need 
to be considered for extension. The others were considered under this agenda item. 
6.3.1.a 
Para 19 of CMM 2017-01 
226. 
The EU introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP01: Proposal for amending CMM 2017-01 for the use of 
non-entangling FADs in WCPFC fisheries, which proposes amendments to 2017-01 specifying that 
FADs to be deployed in the Convention Area be built using non-entangling materials, with a view to 
decreasing entanglement of sharks, sea turtles and other species. It also directs SC and TCC to work to 
develop biodegradable FAD designs by 2020. In response to a query from Korea regarding the impacts 
on catch of target species through the use of non-entangling FADs, the EU stated that its fleet was 
already using the designs in other fisheries, and its research revealed there was no impact. Responding 
to a question from Japan on the inclusion of biodegradable FADs in the proposal, the EU clarified that 
in its proposed text, biodegradable FADs were not considered but its inclusion was, in fact, suggested 
in a paper submitted by FFA, which could be supported by the EU and incorporated in the final text if 
all members agree. 
227. 
Following discussion in the margins of WCPFC15, the EU reviewed proposed changes to their 
proposal. As a compromise the updated proposal introduced, as a first step, the low risk entangling 
FADs.  During the ensuing discussion France underlined the importance of adapting the best available 
standards for FADs, the need for WCPFC to contribute to the Kobe Process joint working group on 
FADs, and congratulated SPC for its work in monitoring drifting FADs in the Pacific. FSM stated that 
the PNA were moving to adopt a requirement for fully non-entangling FADS that will apply in all PNA 
EEZs in the future.  
228. 
Members discussed the desirability and difficulties of applying the measure to drifting FADs, and 
the Chair noted that the measure applied only to WCPFC CCMs. Some CCMs highlighted the 
importance of addressing drifting FADs, and of ensuring fleets operating within the WCPFC 
 
40  
  
Convention Area complied with the standards set by the Commission, while the United States raised the 
potential compliance difficulties faced by its vessels fishing in both the WCPFC Convention Area and 
the adjacent IATTC waters.  
229. 
Following further consultation, the United States observed that the language as proposed was 
sufficiently similar to that used by the IATTC to enable its vessels to comply with the requirements of 
both RFMOs, and supported the measure on that basis, while noting that if changes were made by 
IATTC to its FAD standards it would want to revisit this section of the measure to ensure continued 
compatibility.  
230. 
The Commission agreed to language for paras. 19–22 of CMM 2018-01.  
6.3.1.b 
Para. 28 allocation process 
231. 
The Chair referred to the text of para. 28 of CMM 2017-01: “The limits set out in Attachment 1, 
Table 2 do not confer the allocation of rights to any CCM and are without prejudice to future decisions 
of the Commission. By 2019 the Commission shall agree on hard effort or catch limits in the high seas 
of the Convention Area and a framework for the allocation of those limits in the high seas amongst all 
Members and Participating Territories that adequately take into account Articles 8, 10 (3) and 30 of 
the Convention. The Commission shall also consider options as to how CCMs would use their limits”, 
and noted the need to determine a process for allocations to take place, and enable considerations at 
WCPFC16. She asked members for proposals including on how the Commission could start discussions 
in early 2019.  
232. 
Korea stated that the high seas fish effort needed to be adjusted in accordance with Convention 
Article 8 (Compatibility of Conservation and Management Measures). It noted the need for sufficient 
time for discussions, and stated that the limits set forth in CMM 2017-01 Attachment 1, Table 2 do not 
confer any rights to CCMs, and that there was therefore a need to start our discussions without any 
assumptions. Korea suggested the need for a special session to address allocations in early 2019.  
233. 
Solomon Islands, on behalf of FFA members, stated that workshops should be undertaken to 
determine high seas allocations, and referenced the discussion in WCPFC15-2018-DP09: Views on 
Paragraphs 28 and 44 of CMM 2017-01. They emphasized the need for preliminary discussions in 
advance of WCPFC16. 
234. 
Kiribati noted it would participate in any work referred under para 28.  
235. 
The EU stated that discussion on allocation needed a comprehensive approach, and that 
conversations regarding the high seas needed to also address allocation in EEZs. It noted both needed 
to be taken into account, and such an approach was in the spirit of cooperation and followed provisions 
of UNCLOS and the UN FSA; to address the high seas without considering the EEZs would be 
discriminatory and neglecting the large majority of tropical tuna fisheries.  
236. 
Niue noted that WCPFC15 had made important progress in addressing conservation and 
management of the fisheries. It noted that implementation of para. 28 must build a framework for the 
need to adequately take into account artisanal fisheries and stated that WCPFC needed to set aside 
sufficient time for needed discussions.  
237. 
The Chair stated that Korea suggested a workshop be held in early 2019, and that a discussion on 
funding had not been held by FAC and might not be possible given the schedule. The workshop duration 
would need to be 1–2 days. She noted that the wording in para. 28 and work agreed to be done in 2019 
 
41  
  
was specific. If a standalone meeting was to be held in 2019, funding (possibly external) would be 
needed. She observed that in the past requests had been made to the Executive Director to explore 
options, but the meeting would in that case be contingent on securing funding. She agreed it was hard 
to think about planning another meeting but stated that if work did not begin before WCPFC16, there 
would be a delay in meeting the timeframes in para 28 of CMM 2017-01. The Chair suggested that 
WCPFC15 agree that the Commission hold a two-day meeting in early 2019, pending availability of 
funds, and the Executive Director is tasked to explore funding options and communicate with members 
intersessionally.  
238. 
Japan stated that it could support the proposed meeting schedule and having it dependent on the 
availability of funds, but noted the need to determine the TORs, and observed the need to address the 
comment from the EU. Japan agreed with the need for the Commission to discuss para. 28, but stated 
there had to be a clear mandate in writing.  
239. 
The Chair agreed that clear directions would be needed and stated she would work with the 
Executive Director to develop brief TORs, taking into account the comments raised. The WCPFC Vice-
Chair subsequently presented draft TORs for a workshop for the framework for allocation for review, 
noting the objectives were drawn from para. 28 of CMM 2017-01. The Chair invited comments noting 
the proposal was to have a 2-day stand-alone workshop, dependent on availability of funds. 
240. 
Japan noted that IOTC and IATTC were addressing allocation, but that their approaches were 
similar to Article 10 of the Convention and did not have a true allocation framework. The EU noted that 
its previous intervention on this point and stated that it could not address high seas without looking at 
the situation in the EEZs. The EU noted there was an obligation for members fishing in high seas and 
coastal States to cooperate in order to ensure effective conservation and management of the stocks, and 
this should be reflected in the tasks or background of the TORs.  
241. 
Tuvalu expressed a preference to retain wording that focussed on holding a workshop on high seas 
allocation. RMI agreed with Tuvalu regarding the workshop focus and saw no need to consider 
processes of other tuna RFMOs. It stated that the workshop would not have a real outcome they could 
foresee, noting that limits are already in place, and that some members were seeking to reinvent the 
situation. 
242. 
During the ensuing discussion, members reiterated their positions, with some advocating for 
consideration of stocks throughout their range, and others seeking to limit the focus to setting high seas 
catch and effort limits. Japan indicated that it would be conducting bilateral discussions with the PNA 
and FFA members in 2019, and with the EU and the United States. Japan expressed its willingness to 
visit any members in the Pacific to have discussions, but not to hold a workshop. It encouraged other 
members to undertake such direct consultations, which it felt would facilitate the discussions. Indonesia 
stated its view that it was mandatory to have a workshop, noting that a discussion of the allocation 
framework would accommodate all these issues raised, including the relationship between high seas and 
EEZ allocations.  
243. 
The Chair stated that in the absence of an agreement on the task a workshop was unlikely to be 
productive, and suggested members consider updating para. 28 of the measure with a new target date of 
2020. Korea and RMI expressed support for this suggestion and there were no views to the contrary.  
6.3.1.c 
FAD definition 
244. 
The United States introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP03: Proposal for a definition of fish aggregating 
device, noting that the existing definition of FAD was overly broad, as it includes natural objects of any 
 
42  
  
size, and spoke of the need to adopt a definition of FAD that can be used in all of the Commission’s 
work. It noted that the FAD management options IWG had been working on FAD designs and materials, 
and in its third meeting proposed minimum guidelines for FADs. The United States proposed to modify 
the definition of FAD so as to focus on FADs of interest from the standpoint of management and noted 
the benefits of aligning the WCPFC definition of FADs with the IATTC definition. The United States 
noted that Korea had a very similar proposal, and suggested it be discussed in the tropical tuna CMM 
SWG. The EU noted that the proposed definition mentioned only “objects deployed and/or tracked by 
vessels, …. for purse-seine fishing operations” and noted that FADs are also used with other fishing 
gear.  
245. 
Korea introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP17: Proposed changes to conservation and management 
measure 2009-02 on the application of high seas FAD closures and catch retention, noting its proposal 
was similar to that of the United States. Korea noted it had been almost 10 years since the current 
definition of FAD was adopted by the WCPFC, that improvements had been made in CMMs over this 
period, and that the current definition was overly broad.  
246. 
Following further consideration of the two proposals by members in a SWG, Korea produced new 
proposed text in consultation with CCMs for inclusion in the FAD closure definition, which comprised 
a list of materials that should not be considered as FADs in the context of the FAD closure measure.  
247. 
RMI thanked Korea for the proposed language, agreed in principle on the need to examine the issue, 
and suggested this be looked at in 2019. It noted there were some merits to the proposed list, but that 
some elements might require further assessment. RMI stated it was prepared to work with Korea and 
other members, and possibly examine the definition of FADs in 2019, including in the context of PNA 
FAD tracking.  
248. 
The United States reminded members that two proposals had been submitted on the issue and stated 
it had been involved with Korea in the discussions and would like to see progress at WCPFC15.  
249. 
Japan thanked Korea for its efforts and expressed support for improving the definition of FADs, but 
raised the need to look at possible negative effects of changing the definition, and specifically about the 
potential impact of excluding logs; it suggested the need to look at the entire CMM with respect to the 
FAD definition, which could have a negative effect on tuna stocks, particularly on bigeye. New Zealand 
and Cook Islands supported the views expressed by RMI and Japan. Tuvalu also expressed concern 
regarding log sets and the impact on bigeye stocks. Tuvalu agreed to the issue of vessels setting on 
FADs when they assume they were setting on a free school should be addressed, but stated it was not 
yet prepared to develop a new definition. Its position was supported by FSM.  
250. 
Following further consultations in the margins, Nauru, on behalf of the PNA, provided new 
language for consideration: “In applying the provisions of paragraphs 16 and 17, any set where small 
amounts of plastic or small garbage that do not have a tracking buoy attached are detected shall not be 
considered to be a FAD set for the purposes of the FAD closure.  This shall apply in 2019 only and will 
be reviewed to determine whether it resulted in increased catch of bigeye and small yellowfin tuna.”  
251. 
The WTPO reinforced its position statements made at WCPFC13 and WCPFC14, which called on 
the Commission to consider and adopt a more specific and enforceable FAD definition measure. The 
WTPO proposed defining FAD to mean “anchored, drifting, floating or submerged objects deployed 
and/or tracked by vessels, including through the use of radio and/or satellite buoys, for the purpose of 
aggregating target tuna species for purse-seine fishing operations.” It noted that using such a definition 
could help alleviate legal issues and penalties currently faced by vessels for making what they perceive 
to be unassociated sets.  
 
43  
  
252. 
The United States thanked Korea, the PNA and others who contributed to the compromise. It noted 
that, as expressed by other CCMs, at times its vessel captains claimed to have trouble with FAD 
requirements, because they establish a set around small natural objects they might not be able to see. It 
noted the proposal was a one-year measure and hoped that the items Korea listed in its proposal could 
be considered further in 2019.  
253. 
Japan thanked all CCMs involved and noted for the record that chopsticks were included in the 
definition of “small garbage”.  
254. 
New Zealand stated its reservations about changing the definition, while recognizing the compliance 
issues raised by other CCMs, and appreciated the efforts to develop a compromise solution. It inquired 
how it could it be determined if the revised definition would result in increased catch. In response to a 
suggestion from Indonesia to broaden the applicability to all tropical tunas, from bigeye and yellowfin, 
it noted that FAD closures are technical measures intended to address the catch of small bigeye and 
yellowfin and preferred retaining that focus. RMI stated that the issue of assessing changes in catch was 
not considered by the SWG. In response to a question from Australia, SPC noted that in the absence of 
a clear definition of what “small amounts of plastic” or “small garbage” represents, data currently 
collected by observers do not allow straightforward identification of this set type. Hence an assessment 
of whether the change in the FAD set definition results in an increase in catches of bigeye tuna is 
difficult.  While in the future observers could potentially provide data to assess catch changes, it would 
require a change to logbook instructions, specific instructions for observers, and clear definitions.   
6.3.1.d 
Expiry of paras. 16, 17, 29, 39 and 56 of CMM 2017-01 
255. 
Members held a discussion regarding expiry of paras. 16, 17, 29, 39 and 56 of CMM 2017-01. The 
United States thanked the Commission for considering the needs of American Samoa, as addressed by 
para. 29 of CMM 2017-01. It noted that the territory faces a number of unique challenges and has 
aspirational and developmental goals but was unable to take advantage of the measures put in place to 
protect SIDS. The United States noted that one cannery was closed, and another closed temporarily, and 
that the United States had closed the high seas to its boats on multiple occasions. It noted its strong 
support for transparent universal measures, stating it would favour a 4-month FAD closure, if other 
CCMs would agree on this as a potential compromise.  
256. 
Tokelau noted the proposal for a 4-month FAD closure as an alternative to para. 17 of CMM 2017-
01was being made very late, had been examined at WCPFC14, and did not have its support. Cook 
Islands supported the position expressed by Tokelau. The United States noted the lack of consensus on 
a core compromise and stated that it remained concerned that para. 17 has a low conservation value, but 
stated it would allow it to continue for the 2-year duration of the measure.  
257. 
Korea thanked CCMs for their efforts on the issue. It noted that some work remained to refine the 
definition of FADs, and welcomed the opportunity to work further with CCMs and PNA CCMs in 2019, 
in conjunction with work on the FAD tracking system. Kiribati thanked the United States and Korea for 
their efforts to develop a compromise.  
258. 
The Commission agreed to adopt CMM 2018-01 Conservation and Management Measure for 
Bigeye, Yellowfin and Skipjack Tuna in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (Attachment G) 
  
 
44  
  
6.3.1.e 
FAD management options-IWG report  
259. 
The Commission adopted the report of the FAD Management Options Intersessional Working 
Group (WCPFC15-2018-FADMO-IWG03).   
 
6.3.2 
Target reference point (bigeye and yellowfin)  
260. 
J. Hampton (SPC) introduced WCPFC15-2018-13_rev1: Minimum TRPs for WCPO yellowfin and 
bigeye tuna consistent with alternative LRP risk levels. He noted that SC14 reviewed information on 
what would be the minimum setting for a candidate spawning-biomass depletion-based TRP for 
yellowfin tuna that avoids breaching the agreed LRP with a specified level of probability under the 
current uncertainty framework (SC14-MI-WP-01). While SC14 noted that the main biological 
consideration for a TRP is that it should be sufficiently above the LRP, SC14 also noted that the choice 
of a TRP can be based on a combination of biological, ecological and socio-economic considerations. 
SC14 recommended that the analyses be repeated for bigeye tuna taking account of the updated 2018 
bigeye stock assessment, and with both ‘recent’ and ‘long term’ recruitment assumptions. The additional 
bigeye analyses are contained within WCPFC15-2018-13_rev1, which updates SC14-MI-WP-01. SPC 
computed median levels of spawning biomass depletion (SB/SBF=0) that are consistent with specified 
risk levels of breaching the limit reference point (LRP) of 0.2SBF=0. The analysis used:  
• the structural uncertainty grid of models used by SC13 for advice from the 2017 yellowfin tuna 
assessment, and  
• the structural uncertainty grid containing only ‘updated new growth’ models used by SC14 as the 
basis for advice from the 2018 update bigeye tuna assessment, under both the ‘recent’ and ‘long 
term’ assumptions for future bigeye recruitment, to generate 30-year projections that included 
stochastic variability in future recruitment under a variety of fishing levels scaled to the 2013–2015 
averages.  
 
261. 
The main results are summarised in Table 1.  
Table 1: Median levels of SB2045/SBF=0 for the four nominated levels of risk of breaching the LRP. 
Risk level 
Yellowfin tuna 
Bigeye tuna 
 
 
‘Recent’ recruitment 
‘Long-term’ 
recruitment 
5% 
0.36 
0.33 
0.38 
10% 
0.34 
0.30 
0.34 
15% 
0.31 
0.29 
0.32 
20% 
0.29 
0.28 
0.29 
 
262. 
These are values of SB/SBF=0 that, if achieved on average, are predicted to result in the specified 
levels of risk of breaching the LRP, and thus may be interpreted as minimum levels of SB/SBF=0 
consistent with those risk levels, under the current uncertainty framework. SC14 recommended that 
WCPFC15 take note of these results in consideration of management objectives upon which any 
candidate TRPs for yellowfin tuna and bigeye tuna should be based, and in so doing clarify the 
management objectives for these species (including the selection of risk levels) so that additional work 
identified by SC14 can be undertaken. 
 
45  
  
263. 
Japan agreed that TRPs should be based on both biological and socioeconomic factors. It noted that 
a paper prepared for SC14 that addressed economic projections suggested the economic index of the 
longline fishery was declining but would increase for the purse seine fishery. Japan noted this needed 
to be considered when seeking to balance different gear types. 
264. 
In response to a query from Indonesia, SPC stated that the 2018 bigeye stock assessment update 
showed a long-term increase in the spawning biomass ratio, but that that this did not really influence the 
current work. It noted the numbers represented minimum targets, and constituted a buffer from the LRP, 
with specified levels of risk. There are many other issues to consider, including economic aspects and 
ecological effects, and various parties may have differing views on what is important. SPC noted that 
rationalizing these issues is a focus of the harvest strategy work now underway.  
265. 
Tonga, on behalf of FFA members, introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP08: Views of tropical tuna 
CMM, setting out their broad management objectives for bigeye and yellowfin under the tropical tuna 
measure, and to be taken into account in considering TRPs for the stocks. The objectives are (i) to 
maintain the stocks above levels where there is a very low risk of breaching the LRP consistent with the 
guidelines in the UN FSA; and (ii) achieve modest increases to SB/SBF=0 compared to recent levels in 
order to support ongoing economic management of the purse seine fishery and facilitate development 
opportunities for SIDS longline fisheries. They noted the Commission was beginning a discussion that 
should result in a decision on TRPs in 2019. They noted their preferred objectives for the TRP-setting 
process and continuation of the current measure through 2019. They noted their objection to weakening 
of the measure. 
266. 
New Zealand supported the statement by Tonga regarding FFA members’ objectives. 
267. 
The EU broadly agreed with observations made by SPC and SC, noting that if stocks remained 
within safe biological limits, TRPs could be adjusted based on other criteria. It questioned however the 
pertinence of a precautionary TRP based on a very low probability of breaching a very conservative 
LRP that is not species specific. It reiterated that the LRP of 0.2SBF=0originated with work on demersal 
species that are far less resilient than tuna stocks, and suggested that species specific LRPs should be 
developed that take into account the key biological features of the tuna stocks being managed by 
WCPFC. It indicated that the LRP of 0.2SBF=0 could not be considered a biological reference point.  It 
reminded that the LRP was decided before the Harvest Strategies concept is developed and that in the 
light of the new approach all the key elements of a Harvest Strategy should be open for discussion.  It 
also observed that development of TRPs for multi-gear fisheries could not be based on a species-specific 
approach, in the sense that it might not be possible to achieve simultaneously precautionary TRPs for 
all the key species in such a complex fishery. EU suggested testing the TRP adopted for skipjack, 
monitoring the trajectory of other key species and based on this experience consider appropriate and 
realistic TRPs for other species. SPC stated that Australia’s Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial 
Research Organisation (CSIRO) found 20% was an appropriate LRP for productive stocks; less 
productive stocks would have LRPs of 30%–40%, but most species were fairly resilient. SPC noted the 
difficulty in discriminating in terms of resilience across species that are fairly closely related from an 
evolutionary standpoint. SPC indicated the Commission had taken heed of the precautionary approach 
in choosing an LRP 20%, and that much thought had been given to this. 
268. 
FSM, on behalf of the PNA, supported the FFA position in WCPFC15-2018-DP08 as outlined by 
Tonga, stating that the proposed objectives for bigeye and yellowfin are relatively consistent with the 
objectives of CMM 2017-01 but also seek to ensure biological safety through reference to the LRP and 
to allow for consideration of increases to SB/SBF=0 levels. They noted that these proposals were put 
forward as a starting point for discussions, but that much work was needed before these could be 
converted into candidate TRPs, including defining what “very low risk” and “modest increases” mean 
 
46  
  
for short or medium-term management measures. They looked forward to hearing from other CCMs on 
their objectives for these stocks, and for the fisheries they support. 
269. 
 Japan stated, with respect to bigeye and the review of CMM 2017-01, that following adoption of 
CMM 2008-01, Japan has implemented all tuna measures faithfully, scrapped many vessels, and seen a 
large decline in catch, with a large reduction in purse seine FADs sets. Japan noted that despite these 
efforts the situation with respect to bigeye and skipjack was worsening in waters around Japan, with 
serious impacts on Japanese fishermen, particularly coastal small-scale fishermen, including their 
catches and cultural activities centred around tuna species. Japan also highlighted that SC14 noted there 
was a high risk of breaching LRP and zero probability of achieving the objective of CMM2017-01 under 
the long-term average recruitment scenario. Japan stated that it opposed any weakening of tropical tuna 
CMMs at WCPFC15. 
270. 
Pew, on behalf of Pew, WWF, Sustainable Fisheries Partnership, IPNLF, ISSF, and EDF, urged the 
Commission not to weaken the overall impact of management measures in the tropical tuna bridging 
measure. They observed that WCPFC members have agreed to apply the precautionary approach and 
stated that the Commission should not agree to a measure that does not meet the scientific advice to 
maintain bigeye and yellowfin fishing mortality. They noted the somewhat improved bigeye tuna stock 
status and stated the challenge for the Commission is to maintain this status. Given the high levels of 
uncertainty with respect to the long-term scenarios for the stock under the current management 
arrangements, they urged the Commission not to increase fishing mortality, but instead to use this 
opportunity to carefully consider developing management objectives for the stocks and accelerate 
development of a long-term harvest strategy for bigeye and yellowfin. They also noted the agenda items 
with respect to FADs, and urged the Commission to also follow the scientific advice to improve the 
sustainability of the FAD fishery by adopting science-based limits on FAD deployments and/or FAD 
sets, and adopting a binding requirement to use FAD designs that minimize or prevent the risk of 
entanglement, with a clear timeframe to transition to the use of biodegradable materials as soon as 
possible. 
271. 
The Chair stated that review of the measure would continue in a SWG. She referenced WCPFC15-
2018-DP29: Indonesia’s bigeye tuna catch limits in longline fisheries, which reflects Indonesia’s views. 
She noted the Commission had not yet conducted a thorough review of WCPFC fisheries and 
management objectives.   
272. 
The outcome of discussions on the tropical tuna measure are under Agenda Item 6.3.1 (see above).  
6.3.3 
Harvest control rules (skipjack)   
273. 
There was no discussion under this agenda item. 
 
6.4 Pacific bluefin tuna 
6.4.1 
Review of CMM 2017-08  
274. 
The following reference documents were prepared on this agenda item: WCPFC15-2018-16: 
Reference document for review of CMM 2017-08 and for the development of harvest strategies under 
CMM 2014-06 (Pacific bluefin tuna), and WCPFC15-2018-IP07: Compiled information on Pacific 
bluefin tuna fishing effort and catch (TCC14-2018-IP12_rev1).  
 
47  
  
275. 
Japan introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP25: Proposal for amending Conservation and Management 
Measure for Pacific bluefin tuna (CMM2017-08), which was previously submitted to NC14. It noted a 
lack of consensus among CCMs at NC14 regarding an increase in catch limits.  It stated that at the 
special session of NC held in the margins of the meeting, consensus was reached on a change to the 
existing CMM (reflected in DP25) that allows a CCM to carry forward the under catch of a catch limit 
up to 5% of its initial catch limit, to provide some flexibility regarding catch limits. The same measure 
was adopted by IATTC earlier in 2018. 
276. 
New Zealand, on behalf of FFA members, thanked the NC Chair, and stated they had no objections 
to the proposal. The EU noted the presentation on the stock status indicated the condition was poor, and 
felt the flexibility was not proportional to the stock status. The NC Chair stated that if CCMs could not 
accept the current draft, it must be returned to NC for its consideration.  
277. 
The Commission agreed to adopt CMM 2018-02 Conservation and Management Measure for 
Pacific Bluefin tuna, which will replace CMM 2017-08 (Attachment H).    
 
6.5 North Pacific albacore  
6.5.1 
Review of CMM-2005-03  
278. 
The Chair noted two relevant documents — WCPFC15-2018-17: Reference document for review 
of CMM 2005-03 and development of harvest strategies under CMM 2014-06 (North Pacific albacore) 
and WCPFC15-2018-IP08: Updated information on North Pacific albacore effort data (TCC14-2018-
IP11) — and the stock assessment update provided under Agenda Item 6.1.  
6.6 North Pacific striped marlin  
279. 
The WCPFC Secretariat prepared WCPFC15-2018-18: Reference document for the scientific 
information and development of harvest strategies for North Pacific striped marlin (Kajikia audax) for 
consideration by the Commission. 
6.6.1 
Designation as a Northern stock and rebuilding plan  
280. 
The Chair noted that the issue of designation of North Pacific striped marlin and formulation of a 
rebuilding plan had been before the Commission for several years. WCPFC14 tasked SC14 to provide 
advice, which it did in the form of proposed criteria that could be used to determine whether this could 
be designated as a northern stock. A recommendation was made previously for the Commission to adopt 
a rebuilding plan for the stock, but that has not occurred.  
281. 
The United States confirmed that the issue was a longstanding one but stated that SC14 had provided 
the needed information. It stated that it did not believe the language in the Convention is vague, but 
agreed that it could be helpful to formalize the process for designating a “northern stock”. The NC’s 
purview is stocks that occur mostly north of 20°N, and the United States stated the criteria should be 
based on where the majority (or greater than 50%) of the stock occurs. The first criteria suggested by 
SC14 to consider is the proportion of total biomass of the stock occurring north of 20°N;  if information 
is available to suggest that the total biomass of the stock occurring north of 20°N is greater than 50%, 
then the United States believes that the stock should be designated as a northern stock. For North Pacific 
striped marlin, the information provided by SC indicates that the proportion of the biomass north of 
20°N was estimated to be 2–4 times larger than the proportion of biomass south 20°N; consequently, it 
should be designated as a northern stock for process reasons. The United States noted its continuing 
 
48  
  
concern about North Pacific striped marlin and looked forward to a new stock assessment from ISC in 
2019, and stated it intended to introduce a rebuilding plan for North Pacific striped marlin in 2019. The 
United States stated the stock would benefit from the designation, because NC could then begin a 
discussion on rebuilding and bring a sound recommendation for the Commission to consider. 
282. 
The EU stated that the table provided by SC14 was a useful tool for making such an assessment, 
but stated there was a need to list the CCMs involved in harvesting the species (directly or indirectly), 
as not all are members of the NC. The EU inquired whether any subsidiary bodies had taken action for 
the species, noting the recurring recommendations from the SC, and the continuing circular discussion 
at Commission meetings. It observed the stock is heavily overfished, and recommended that the 
Commission recommend that ISC conduct projections, and that based on that advice and 
recommendations from SC15, WCPFC16 should adopt a recovery plan. 
283. 
RMI, on behalf of FFA members, noted the long-standing debate over whether or not certain stocks, 
including North Pacific striped marlin, should be designated as northern stocks. They stated that clear 
criteria for making this determination are still absent, and that while the debate has continued, important 
stocks are not being managed. They stated the problem was exacerbated by SC not being given the 
opportunity to properly review the science for the stocks, as assessments are conducted by ISC with no 
real opportunity for proper review by WCPFC. They stated that the lack of agreement on the designation 
of the stocks was affecting their proper management and impacting on the reputation of WCPFC and its 
members. They observed the NC has seemingly become a “Commission within a Commission” with its 
own science and rules. They opposed designation of any additional stocks as northern stocks, noting 
that a number of FFA members have an interest in the stocks under discussion and are determined to 
see them managed effectively by the Commission. They stated they expected stock assessments for the 
stocks to be presented to SC to allow for comprehensive review by all CCMs, and CCMs having the 
greatest impact on the stocks to bring management proposals to WCPFC for debate and hopefully 
approval.  
284. 
Canada agreed that the issue had been tabled many times and appreciated the clarity SC brought to 
the issue. It endorsed the approach of the United States proposal, which it stated was in line with the 
convention text and intent, and enabled further action in response to the scientific advice.  
285. 
FSM, on behalf of FFA members, stated that key information to determine whether North Pacific 
striped marlin is a northern stock is not available, and therefore it should remain as a WCPO stock. They 
noted the United States has submitted a draft rebuilding plan to NC14 for north Pacific striped marlin, 
but stated that a full stock assessment needs to be undertaken prior to the establishment of the rebuilding 
plan to inform the current starting point, the appropriate risk level, and the appropriate rebuilding period. 
They proposed that WCPFC15 request the ISC to present a new full stock assessment for north Pacific 
striped marlin to SC15 in 2019 so that Commission members are able to assess the appropriate level of 
risk and the appropriate rebuilding period to rebuild stocks to 0.2SBF=0.  
286. 
Japan noted that its colleague from ISC indicated that results of the stock assessment have been 
provided to SC; the last assessment was performed in 2015, and presented to SC. It stated that it 
nevertheless seemed that the Commission, as a whole, was less interested than NC members in northern 
stocks. Japan stated if the species was designated as a northern stock, NC could act, based on the 2019 
stock assessment; otherwise the Commission would be facing the same issues in 2019. Japan indicated 
its wish was not to occupy this stock by NC members, but to focus on conservation and management of 
the stock.  
287. 
The Chair stated it was unfortunate that the same discussion was repeated each year. She noted any 
member could provide a recommendation to the Commission, and that there was no lack of data for 
 
49  
  
anyone to take action. She noted that WCPFC14 had agreed to try and resolve the designation issue, and 
that SC14 did what was asked, but that the criteria did not help, and inquired whether a rebuilding plan 
could be developed. 
288. 
The United States stated that it was asking that North Pacific striped marlin be designated as a 
northern stock because it would raise the priority for NC and require NC to take action. It observed that 
all NC decisions are brought to the Commission for adoption, and that all stock assessments for northern 
stocks are reviewed by SC before they are acted upon. The United States noted again the clear 
information from SC14, and stated that if WCPFC15 declined to designate the stock as a northern stock 
the Commission should not come back to the issue.  
289. 
The NC Chair acknowledged the frustration expressed by the WCPFC Chair. He noted that when 
NC advised on species not designated as northern stocks, that advice was typically ignored, and that NC 
was consequently very reluctant to work on species that had not been designated as northern stocks. The 
Chair noted that the designation issue was almost impossible to resolve, but that management of the 
stock, which is the is core business of the Commission, has been neglected in part because of the 
designation question, and stated it needed to be set aside.  
290. 
CCMs held further discussions regarding designation and action on a rebuilding plan. RMI noted it 
was prepared to work with FFA and others to develop a measure for the stock. The EU agreed on the 
need to take action, and asked whether NC could be tasked with proposing a rebuilding plan, or SC or 
SPC should be tasked with this. EU suggested there should be a clear timeline of what is to be done and 
by whom.  
291. 
The United States reiterated its view that harvest strategies need not be in the form of a CMM, and 
committed to submitting a draft rebuilding plan for consideration by WCPFC16.  
292. 
The Commission noted that it was unable to agree on the designation of North Pacific striped 
marlin as a northern stock.  The Commission acknowledged that North Pacific striped marlin is 
experiencing overfishing and is overfished and notes that the ISC work plan for 2018-19 includes 
completing a benchmark North Pacific striped marlin assessment which will be presented to SC15.  
The Commission agreed with the concern expressed by SC and NC over the status of North Pacific 
striped marlin.  It accepted the recommendations of SC11, SC12, SC13 and SC14 that the 
Commission develop a rebuilding plan, and of NC13 and NC14 which “urged the Commission to 
develop a rebuilding plan for the stock as a matter of priority”.  In the absence of any action in 
response to date, the Commission strongly encouraged those CCMs whose fleets are catching North 
Pacific striped marlin to submit a draft rebuilding plan to WCPFC16 to provide for the update of 
CMM 2010-01 Conservation and Management Measure for North Pacific Striped Marlin. 
6.7 Others  
293. 
Australia noted the scientific advice and recommendation by SC13, which was confirmed by SC14, 
on the rapid increases in fishing mortality and declines in spawning biomass between the mid-1990s 
and 2010 and the subsequent need for stronger management of South Pacific swordfish, including 
development of appropriate management measures for the area north of 20°S. Australia noted that in 
the context of those recommendations it considers the current CMM to be relatively weak, with little 
capacity to prevent further increases in fishing mortality, representing a real risk for the future of the 
stock. Noting this and SC’s recommendations, Australia stated it would explore further options for 
improved management of the South Pacific swordfish and would submit recommendations to SC15 and 
 
50  
  
TCC15 in 2019. It stated it would be mindful of Article 30 of the Convention and the need to avoid 
disproportionate impact on SIDS. 
 
AGENDA ITEM 7  — HARVEST STRATEGY  
7.1 Management Objectives (all stocks/fisheries)   
294. 
The Chair noted that the outcomes of discussions on tropical purse seine fisheries at WCPFC13 and 
in the “strawman document” were not agreed but were used by SPC as indicative in terms of MSE, and 
have been included in SC discussions regarding performance indicators. She stated that the management 
objectives were likely to form part of the proposed 2019 dialog for which TORs are being considered.  
7.2 Monitoring Strategy (all stocks/fisheries)  
There was no discussion under this agenda item. 
 
7.3 Harvest Strategy for Pacific bluefin, North Pacific albacore and North Pacific swordfish  
295. 
The NC Chair stated that a harvest strategy had been adopted for Pacific bluefin tuna and North 
Pacific albacore, and these have been adopted by the Commission. The NC is now working on MSEs; 
workshops have been held for Pacific bluefin tuna and North Pacific albacore. Work has started on a 
harvest strategy for North Pacific swordfish. 
296. 
The representative of Sustainable Fisheries Partnership Foundation (who indicated it had an interest 
in the import and distribution of tuna, swordfish and mahi mahi into North American and EU markets) 
noted its specific interest in North Pacific swordfish and pan-Pacific mahi mahi. It stated that there is a 
growing market demand for sustainability assurance for all fish products and an imperative to support 
small-scale fisheries. With regard to swordfish, recognising the progress the Commission has made for 
the North Pacific stock, it asked the Commission to continue to develop the harvest strategy, but also to 
urgently implement management reference points for the stock to address the market needs. The same 
market needs for visible sustainability apply to mahi mahi. It requested the Commission to: (i) ensure 
all fishery participants are immediately required to provide catch and effort data for this species; (ii) 
instruct SC to develop an appropriate stock assessment within the next three years; and (iii) in advance 
of the delivery of the stock assessment, define precautionary management measures based on the results 
of the productivity-susceptibility analysis reported in WCPFC–SC2–2006/EB WP–1. The Foundation 
noted that all stocks need reference points, but believe these stocks should be prioritised.  
297. 
In reply to a query from the EU regarding financial support needed for the MSE work, the NC Chair 
stated that financial support was provided by member countries, including Japan and the United States, 
and that enough resources were available to pursue the work. 
7.4 Terms of Reference for a Science-Management Dialogue  
298. 
SPC introduced WCPFC15-2018-20: Key decisions for Managers and Scientists under the Harvest 
Strategy Approach for WCPO tuna stocks and fisheries, noting that the paper provides ideas on decisions 
managers will need to consider as the harvest strategy process proceeds.  It noted the key role of the 
science–management dialogue was to address cross-cutting issues, enable managers to provide 
leadership and guidance to scientists, and to facilitate the iterative decision-making process and enable 
provision of feedback. 
 
51  
  
299. 
RMI noted the need to address multiple gear and species fisheries, and to examine principles and 
practicalities for data collection. It warned against revisiting issues that had already been addressed.  
300. 
The EU suggested that the Science Management Dialogue, at least in the beginning, should not be 
seen as the forum where the decisions for the key elements of harvest strategies would be decided, but 
rather as an opportunity for Managers to better understand their role and effectively get involved in the 
MSE process. That would allow staring a constructive dialogue by focusing initially on non-contentious 
issues. 
301. 
China stated that it understood the majority of CCMs would like to have a mechanism for a science-
management dialogue but stated that participation in this approach in other RFMOs is very low. 
302. 
The Executive Director presented WCPFC15-2018-21: Terms of reference for a science 
management dialogue. He stated that WCPFC14 agreed to reprioritize the agendas for the Commission 
and SC meetings to provide sufficient time to allow for a discussion of the WCPO harvest strategy, and 
recognized the need for a dedicated science-management dialogue. The terms of reference (TORs) were 
developed in response to that recognition by the Commission, and were developed jointly by the 
Secretariat and SPC, to provoke discussion on two components: consideration elements and consultative 
draft TORs. Discussions were held at SC14, both in plenary and in a SWG. The TORs in WCPFC15-
2018-21 are a refinement that account for the discussions at SC14. The objectives of the dialogue are to 
(i) enhance mutual understanding and capacity building, (ii) facilitate the iterative process of harvest 
strategy decision-making by the Commission and its committees, and (iii) to refine candidate harvest 
strategy options and forward a reduced number of acceptable candidates to the Commission to increase 
effectiveness.  The key tasks of the dialogue are to review and refine SC outputs on MSE, and make 
recommendations to the Commission regarding appropriate candidate harvest strategies that meet 
management objectives for the fishery stocks.  
303. 
SPC outlined Appendix 1 of WCPFC15-2018-21 to provide an idea of how an initial meeting could 
be structured, suggesting two days would be appropriate. 
304. 
New Zealand, on behalf of FFA members, thanked the Executive Director and recalled agreement 
at SC14 that such a dialogue would be useful to help the Commission make use of best-practice fishery 
management processes, as well as some disagreements on matters of detail. They outlined that FFA 
members’ view was that the first meeting of the science-management dialogue should be a trial — if 
the subsequent Commission meeting assesses it has not met its probationary objectives, it would be 
discontinued.  They stated the recommendations of the body should carry weight within the 
Commission, and it should be a formal subsidiary body of the Commission in the form of a Committee 
under Article 11(6) of the Convention. It would not be a capacity-building workshop, but would make 
recommendations for consideration by the Commission, and should include a scientific and a 
management representative from each CCM. They noted the paper suggests the dialogue begin through 
an informal "capacity-building" session, followed by a formal "decision-making" session, but FFA 
members feel strongly this should not be a capacity-building process; after four capacity-building 
management objectives workshops, further learning about the Harvest Strategy Approach should be by 
implementing it. Other stakeholders should either be included in national delegations, or as observers, 
and closed sessions should be allowed for any discussions as decided by the committee. 
305. 
Japan expressed no preference whether this should be a subsidiary body or more informal working 
group, but stated that if it will make recommendations, it should be a subsidiary body. It preferred it be 
held in conjunction with the annual meeting, because its scientists attend SC, while managers attend the 
annual meeting. It expressed concern that SPC stated it could not calculate all indicators for skipjack 
and stated a discussion would have to be held on how these could be calculated. 
 
52  
  
306. 
Niue, on behalf of FFA members, supported earlier comments by New Zealand, and stated that in 
their view: 
a) this would not be a body to filter the output of SC, and SC would continue to report directly to the 
Commission. This would be a body for generating science-based management recommendations to 
the Commission, while SC would continue to provide scientific input and answers to questions 
posed by the Commission; 
b) it should not be restricted to considering only the application of the harvest strategy approach —
other aspects of best practice management should also be considered, including the application of 
the ecosystem approach, and measuring and accounting for social and economic drivers of fishery 
performance. It could also be useful in advising the Commission on aspects of allocation between 
CCMs, in their roles as flag States and coastal States; 
c) the dialogue should have a role in reviewing (and possibly developing) harvest strategy measures, 
and should not affect the right of individual or groups of CCMs to propose measures; and  
d) FFA members feel very strongly it should meet immediately after SC, as clearly explained at SC14. 
SC should to be shortened slightly to make room for the dialogue to follow, and FFA members have 
a proposal for doing so. 
 
307. 
PNG, on behalf of the PNA, supported the comments of New Zealand and Niue, and supported 
beginning a science-management dialogue in 2019. They noted this could help the Commission to 
mainstream harvest strategy development in its work. They noted that PNA support for the dialogue is 
contingent on the meeting happening immediately after SC, in order to optimise efficiency and have the 
greatest chance of influencing decision making at the following Commission meeting. 
308. 
The EU expressed its general agreement with the principles of the TORs of the working group and 
voiced a preference to adopt a progressive approach on the science-management dialogue that might 
start by the constitution of a working group, and which could later evolve to a subsidiary body, if 
necessary. At the same time, for practical reasons and to contain financial participatory costs related to 
the participation of managers in this group, the meeting of the working group should be organised back 
to back to the Annual Meeting, at least in the first stages of the working group. This would facilitate the 
participation of all relevant stakeholders and enable a smooth start of the working group but could be 
changed at a later stage to another schedule arrangement when the working group is more organised and 
according to the needs of the dialogue. 
309. 
The United States voiced general support for establishment of a working group for the harvest 
strategy. It suggested it could be open to involvement of external experts, and suggested the need for 
flexibility in terms of its function and size, but stated that the focus should be on the harvest strategy. 
310. 
Chinese Taipei supported having a physical meeting in 2019 to progress harvest strategy 
development. It suggested the meeting be held as a working group in 2019, and whether or not to form 
a subsidiary body could be considered in the future. It supported having managers, scientists and 
stakeholders at the meeting, and stated it should be held one or two days before the annual meeting to 
be most cost-effective. This position was also voiced by the EU which noted the importance to consider 
the cost implications.  
311. 
Canada support holding a dialogue that includes fisheries managers, scientists and others (e.g., 
industry and NGOs). It suggested further discussion was needed on the structure of the body. 
312. 
Korea supported establishment of a dialogue through a working group under the control of the 
Commission. It noted it could be given authority in the terms of reference to ensure that it can make 
appropriate recommendations, and suggested it be co-chaired initially by the TCC and SC chairs (with 
 
53  
  
others possibly elected subsequently to reduce the workload of the TCC and SC chairs). Korea suggested 
one senior fisheries scientist and one manager should attend for each CCM, as well as other stakeholders, 
with a two-day meeting to cover the four key stocks. Korea suggested that the dialogue be scheduled in 
conjunction with the annual meeting and focus on the development of the harvest strategy. 
313. 
The Philippines supported the statements by the EU and Korea. 
314. 
Palau on behalf of the PNA Chair, stated they were only prepared to support the proposed dialogue 
if it is held immediately following SC. They noted this has been their consistent position since the 
management objectives/harvest strategy workshop process ceased in 2015, and that the PNA sees no 
merit in a meeting held in conjunction with the WCPFC annual meeting because delegations then arrive 
with their national positions already determined.  They noted that some key delegations did not 
participate at the senior level in the management options workshops, making the discussions there 
useless. Holding meetings late in the year and in conjunction with the Commission presents serious 
disruption to FFA and PNA member preparation, which they cannot sustain. PNA was adamant the 
proposed dialogue can only work in conjunction with the SC. 
315. 
RMI, on behalf of the PNA, stated they were relatively relaxed about the formal classification of 
the dialogue, but that to be effective it: 
• 
should be able to make recommendations to the Commission that have the same weight as issues 
forwarded by SC and TCC;  
• 
not be simply a capacity building workshop;  
• 
be subject to the normal rules of participation, quorum, chairing and decision-making; and  
• 
have funding for participation by a scientist and a manager from each SIDS. 
 
316. 
Indonesia supported the proposal for a science–management dialogue, but noted the need for 
information on the cost implications. The Executive Director provided the following estimates: for a 2-
day meeting attached to SC and held in Pohnpei, about US$85,000. If a stand-alone meeting in Pohnpei, 
around US$180,000. If held in conjunction with WCPFC16 in Port Moresby, about US$98,000. In 
response to a query from the EU, the Executive Director stated that for a dialogue held after SC, the 
amount quoted was the cost of an additional ticket to bring in a manager, because the Commission 
already funds a delegate to SC. For stand-alone meetings the cost is for both delegates. If the dialogue 
is held in conjunction with the annual meeting the cost is for one additional ticket, hopefully for a 
national scientist.  
317. 
The Chair summarised that there was broad support for the need for the dialogue to happen, which 
would focus on development of harvest strategy elements. With regard to the structure, while there was 
no broad support for a formal subsidiary body, members supported formal status, so it can provide 
advice to the Commission. She noted the divergence was on the timing. She suggested putting the timing 
issue aside and focussing on the TORs.  
318. 
Following further discussion in a SWG, Japan stated that while Article 11, paragraph 6 of the 
Convention allowed for the establishment of subsidiary bodies, including working groups, which can 
report to the Commission, Japan was unsure whether it can make recommendations to the Commission, 
or to SC or TCC. The Legal Adviser confirmed that Article 11, paragraph 6 of the Convention provides 
for the Commission to establish subsidiary bodies and working groups. She noted this was a broad 
function within the Convention. She stated that a review of past practice in the Commission indicated 
that intersessional working groups had been established and had provided recommendations directly to 
 
54  
  
the Commission and also to other subsidiary bodies. She noted the Commission has a fairly broad 
mandate. Japan stated that while past practice was not strictly speaking legal advice, if the Commission 
had been doing this, and CCMs supported it, Japan could also support it. 
319. 
The Chair stated that members were in agreement to see how the process would work during the 
first year, and had agreed on it being a working group, but needed to determine how outcomes are 
handled, and whether they should be channelled through SC and TCC. Earlier discussions had suggested 
a separate forum was needed to develop harvest strategy options and if the aim is to advance harvest 
strategy work, the group needs to have that ability. Currently practice is to establish IWGs that provide 
recommendations to the Commission, and this proposed process would be similar. The Commission is 
adopting a long-term approach to harvest strategies but are taking a trial approach for 2019. 
320. 
Canada stated its assumption that recommendations would come to the Commission, and if needed 
to SC for further advice and analysis. 
321. 
Indonesia stated its understanding that the proposed working group would focus on communications 
between scientists and managers. It noted SC outputs mostly address stock assessment work, but MSEs 
and the harvest strategy will be different, and not really focussed on stock assessments. Indonesia 
suggested a step could be missing, and requested further explanation, perhaps from SPC, on the harvest 
strategies and how to arrange the process.   
322. 
The Chair noted the issue was how the dialogue communicates with SPC so that the Commission 
can then make decisions. She noted that after past discussions on the harvest strategy, the Commission 
tasked SPC with work that was provided to subsequent meetings. She asked members whether they 
preferred tasking SPC in December to return the next December, or to provide the taskings in August, 
with results provided in December. She noted that the objective was to help inform the Commission and 
enable it to make decisions. The timing of meeting would influence the ability of SPC to provide advice, 
and asked delegates to confirm their views on timing of the meeting.  
323. 
The members reiterated their previous positions, with some advocating for holding the dialogue in 
conjunction with SC, and others for holding a two-day session prior to the annual meeting. The Chair 
summarized the views expressed, and the challenges associated with each proposal. She asked the 
Commission to consider how quickly it sought to progress the harvest strategy work, noting that a 
workplan exists but has not been advanced. 
324. 
Following further discussions with members, and in the absence of a compromise, the Chair 
proposed the harvest strategy discussion be held during the Commission regular annual session, where 
the SC report and SPC advice were available. She noted this would entail extending the Commission 
meeting (with some cost implications) or reducing its agenda.  
325. 
Pew stated that Commission members had agreed that development of harvest strategies was a core 
component of the Commission’s business and one of the most important elements of its future work. It 
stated that the Commission needed to give the harvest strategy work the serious attention it deserves, 
which requires both time and having the right people at the table. It encouraged the Commission to 
revisit the idea of a science-management dialogue and find a way to allow the necessary discussion to 
occur, and experiment with different schedules, perhaps rotating from being associated with one 
Commission meeting to another. 
326. 
RMI and Tokelau supported the Chair’s proposal in view of the lack of a compromise, with Tokelau 
stating that it was a sound idea to mainstream the harvest strategy issues into the work of the 
Commission, while allowing for some discussion in the SC.  The EU stated it would support the Chair’s 
 
55  
  
proposal, noting it was clear that various members had different ideas of what the dialogue should 
achieve, and that some saw it as an opportunity to prepare for the next annual meeting. The EU reiterated 
its view that initially the dialogue should focus on improving managers capacity to engage effectively 
in shaping the MSE framework. It stated that if it is scheduled as a stand-alone dialogue it should be 
distinct from the agenda of the Commission. EU noted that at present only a few people understand the 
mechanics of the MSE (and they probably work for SPC), and there was a need to have managers 
involved, which is in the essence the dialogue. Tonga stated they understood the importance of the 
dialogue and supported the Chair’s proposal. Australia stated they had hoped to secure agreement for a 
dialogue, but in its absence recognized the importance of progressing the work through the SC, TCC 
and Commission meetings. Australia suggested that the harvest strategy dialogue discussion should 
continue in 2019, and the question of how to progress the science-management dialogue be revisited at 
SC16. 
327. 
Commission members agreed to extend the WCPFC16 meeting by one day to allow for more in-
depth discussion of harvest strategy issues. The Secretariat estimated that the additional cost for such 
an extension was approximately US$6,000. The Chair noted that members would have input to the 
agenda and scheduling when arrangements for WCPFC16 were finalized, and that a decision on whether 
to continue this approach for subsequent Commission meetings could be made by WCPFC16, 
particularly in light of the desire of some members to revisit the issue of a dialog at WCPFC16.   
328. 
The Commission agreed to hold a 6-day annual meeting in 2019 with additional time devoted for 
the Commission to discuss harvest strategies.   
 
7.5 Review of Work Plan  
329. 
The Chair noted that WCPFC14 adopted WCPFC15-2018-IP09: Agreed workplan for the adoption 
of Harvest Strategies under CMM 2014-06. The Chair of the Harvest Strategy SWG (Australia) 
introduced revisions to the workplan that reflected SPC capacity and resource constraints. It noted that 
the workplan had initially called for SPC to commence MSE work on bigeye and yellowfin in 2019, but 
that work was now deferred to 2020 because of constraints faced by SPC. Australia noted the addition 
of three items for 2019:  
a) South Pacific albacore — identifying a range of alternative catch pathways to the interim TRP and 
timeframes that achieve this; 
b) Skipjack — SC to advise on required analyses to support TRP review; and 
c) SPC to review potential options to capture multi species issues under the harvest strategy process. 
Regarding the need for clarity on whether decisions on harvest strategy elements are “interim”, the 
proposed approach is for the workplan to not state whether a future decision will be interim or otherwise 
but to simply schedule the decision and then let the Commission determine its interim nature. A more 
substantial review of the Harvest Strategy Workplan, with inclusion of more detail, is anticipated during 
SC15 and WCPFC16. 
330. 
Japan noted its earlier concern regarding difficulties faced by SPC in calculating some performance 
indicators for skipjack for the purpose of estimating skipjack MSE, especially in relation to avoiding 
impacts on small fishers. Japan noted its prior intention to address the issue through the harvest strategy 
working group, but given that a working group meeting would not be held it wanted to (i) confirm that 
SPC cannot calculate these indicators, and (ii) if that was correct, confirm that a CCM could present the 
issue in a paper relating to calculation of the skipjack TRP. 
 
56  
  
331. 
SPC stated that as part of the harvest strategy work it was conducting extensive stakeholder 
engagement as it sought to develop performance indicators. SPC agreed that the MSE framework would 
not include as many of the performance indicators as stakeholders wanted to see because of the need for 
a proper modelling framework, and some aspects (e.g., allocation) are very hard to model. SPC stated 
it would do its best to develop proxies or other quantities that can inform these questions. With respect 
to the issue raised by Japan it stated it should be possible to get some information on skipjack abundance 
in areas where small scale fisheries are located, but that it would discuss the issue in detail as work 
progressed. Japan stated it would be happy to cooperate with SPC on the issue. 
332. 
In response to a suggestion from China, the Chair noted the presentation of species in the workplan 
was not an indication of their priority. 
333. 
The Commission adopted the Updated Workplan for the Adoption of Harvest Strategies under 
CMM 
2014-06 
(WCPFC15-2018-HS_SWGWorkPlan_01, 
dated 
14 
December 
2018) 
(Attachment I*).  
 
AGENDA ITEM 8  — WCPO SHARK STOCKS AND BYCATCH MITIGATION  
334. 
The Chair noted that a reference document had been prepared — WCPFC15-2018-22: Reference 
document for bycatch mitigation CMM reviews.   
 
8.1 Report of the Shark-IWG, including Proposal for a Comprehensive CMM for Sharks and 
Rays  
335. 
Shingo Ota (Japan), the IWG-Sharks Chair noted that the IWG had operated under TORs agreed at 
WCPFC14, and thanked the participants, and Dr Shelley Clarke, who had assisted as technical advisor. 
He stated that prior drafts had been circulated, with the 4th draft reviewed by SC14, the 5th draft by 
TCC14, with the 6th draft available for review at WCPFC15 (WCPFC15-2018-IWGSharks: 6th Draft 
Consolidated Text for the Conservation and Management Measure for Sharks).  
336. 
During WCPFC15 an SWG was established to review and refine the 6th draft. After several rounds 
of discussion, the SWG produced a draft CMM for sharks. During the SWG Japan submitted a proposal 
to replace, among others, para 7 of CMM 2010-07 (how to implement full utilization of sharks) as 
follows: 
“9. 
In order to implement the obligation in paragraph 8, in [2019, 2020, 2021] as an interim 
measure, CCMs shall require their vessels to land sharks with fins naturally attached to the carcass 
or to take alternative compatible measures to ensure that individual shark carcasses and their 
corresponding fins can be identified on board the vessel, such as:  
• 
individual shark carcass with corresponding fins are stored in bag; 
• 
fins are bound to the carcass using rope or wire; or 
• 
tags are attached both to shark carcasses and corresponding fins 
10.  
All CCMs shall report on the implementation of the measures in paragraph 9 no later than 
30 July each year for review by TCC. The report by CCMs shall contain the detailed explanation of 
implementation of paragraph 9 including how the compliance can be monitored. The TCC in [2021] 
shall recommend the measures for [2022] and thereafter to implement the obligations in paragraph 
8 [and 8bis] to be adopted in the Commission.” 
 
57  
  
337. 
Although the SWG extensively discussed this proposal and made many refinements, no consensus 
was reached. The SWG agreed, however, that this proposed language could be a good basis for future 
discussion, and thus should be recorded in the minutes of WCPFC15. 
338. 
During plenary discussions regarding the SWG outcomes, some members noted the need for better 
reporting requirements, and others called for review of the proposal by TCC.  
339. 
Australia stated that while it was disappointed that the Commission is unable to adopt a combined 
measure on sharks at WCPFC15, it wished to thank Japan for the huge amount of work in consulting 
with Commission members through the year, leading the small working group, and its efforts to develop 
alternative measures in concert with their industry. Australia looked forward to building on this work at 
WCPFC16. The United States also expressed its thanks to the IWG-Sharks Chair, and looked forward 
to further discussions in 2019 to strengthen the measure.   
340. 
The EU also thanked the IWG-Sharks Chair for his hard work to progress a new CMM for Sharks. 
Despite no consensus being reached the EU considered that the work done during the Annual Meeting 
SWG opened new avenues that could be important for next year's decision making, which would also 
require intersessional preparation. The EU regretted that the alternative/compatible measures proposed 
for the monitoring of the implementation of the finning ban had not been discussed during the 
intersessional work of the dedicated IWG. It indicated that these alternative measures were proposed 
too late (towards the end of the Annual Meeting) and were not documented to allow members to make 
informed decisions. It invited the proponents to develop these intersessionally and to provide to SC 
and/or TCC15 documented evidence that these measures can be effectively enforced (including at sea), 
monitored and that they will not create any loopholes. 
341. 
The Commission tasked TCC15 with considering the outputs of the shark intersessional working 
group and encouraged interested Members to submit proposals to TCC15.  
 
8.2 Proposal for Best Practice Guidelines for Safe Release of Sharks  
342. 
The Commission adopted the Best Practice Guidelines for Safe Release of Sharks (Attachment 
J).   
 
8.3 North Pacific blue shark – Designation as a northern stock  
343. 
The United States stated that it examined the information provided by SC14 regarding designation 
of North Pacific blue shark as a northern stock, but stated that the data did not allow making a determination 
that the stock is mostly located north of 20°N, and that the United States believes it does not support 
designation as a northern stock at this time. There were no other discussions under this agenda item.  
8.4 Review of CMM 2017-06 on Seabirds  
344. 
New Zealand introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP16: Seabird Interaction Mitigation: Amendment of 
CMM 2017-06 and expressed thanks to various members for helping with the proposal, and to SPC for 
helping to prepare scientific information to support the proposal. The amendments would add hook-
shielding devices to the list of acceptable measures to reduce seabird bycatch south of 30°S, and add a 
requirement to require the use of seabird mitigation measures in the area 30°S to 25°S.  
 
58  
  
345. 
The measure was discussed in a SWG, and members reached consensus in plenary regarding 
WCPFC15-2018-DP16_rev2 following further small changes. New Zealand thanked all members for 
their support for the measure and for their work over several years.   
346. 
Australia expressed its appreciation to New Zealand for its work on the issue. New Caledonia 
thanked all the delegates for their input on this issue and particularly delegates from the EU, China, 
Korea and Japan for the efforts made to take into account their specific circumstances. New Caledonia 
stated that it would continue operating transparently and seeking to ensure sustainability, and would 
seek to improve data collection between 25° S and 30° S by increasing observer coverage as much as 
possible.  
347. 
French Polynesia also thanked all those involved, and especially New Zealand for coordinating the 
positions of all interested parties, and for considering the fisheries development aspirations of SIDS. It 
noted that much remained to be done for seabirds, and that French Polynesia was ready to assist 
whenever possible. 
348. 
 The EU also thanked members for their hard work. It noted that during the discussion that the EU 
was opposed to the exceptions within the measure but stated that these were not that important at present, 
because they did not have relevant impacts on seabirds. EU stated that if fisheries are developed in zones 
that are currently exempted from the measure there would be impacts and given that members have a 
responsibility to protect endangered species, there could be a need for revisions in the future.  
349. 
The Commission agreed to adopt CMM 2018-03 Conservation and Management Measure to 
Mitigate the Impact of Fishing for Highly Migratory Fish Stocks on Seabirds (Attachment K).  
 
8.5 Review of CMM 2008-03 on Sea Turtles  
350. 
The United States introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP06: Revisions to CMM 2008-03 Conservation 
and Management Measure of sea turtles and WCPFC15-2018-DP07: Amendments to the WCPFC 
Regional Observer Programme minimum standard data fields, both of which seek to increase sea turtle 
protection, and stated it looked forward to additional work in the margins of WCPFC15 to progress the 
measures. 
351. 
Following significant discussions in the margins of WCPFC15, the Commission reached agreement 
regarding revisions to CMM 2008-03. The United States thanked members for their cooperation on the 
issue, noting it was a very important step. Regarding WCPFC15-2018-DP07, the United States noted 
that work to modify the ROP minimum data standards was ongoing and stated that it looked forward to 
continuing work with members to further progress the issue in 2019 and beyond. 
352. 
The Commission agreed to adopt CMM 2018-04 Conservation and Management Measure for 
Conservation and Management of Sea Turtles (Attachment L), with a date of implementation of 1 
January 2020. 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 9  — ADOPTION OF REPORTS FROM SUBSIDIARY BODIES  
353. 
The reports of the subsidiary bodies were taken by the Chair as read and were not presented to the 
Commission. However, recommendations of subsidiary bodies not addressed under other agenda items 
were considered under this agenda item.  
 
59  
  
9.1  
SC14  
354. 
The Chair referred the Commission to WCPFC15-2018-23: Synopsis of SC14 summary report for 
agenda item 9.1. She noted that in addition to SC14 recommendations addressed under other agenda 
items, SC14 had recommended to the Commission that it initiate efforts to identify and promote best 
practices for safe release of whale sharks. 
355. 
The EU stated that the work of the SC and advice the Commission received was outstanding and 
thanked its members. It suggested that it would be useful when discussing projections for species under 
management to consider both very long-term projections, and shorter periods (e.g. 5 years, and up to 15 
or 20 years) to further inform Commission decisions. It also stated that it perceived there were 
inconsistencies in terms of the advice offered for various species. As an example, the EU contrasted the 
very precautionary advice offered for bigeye tuna, which had a quite positive stock status assessment, 
and the lack of proportionately cautionary advice for Pacific bluefin tuna, the stock of which has been 
assessed to be overfished, with overfishing occurring. The EU suggested the need to ensure there is 
greater consistency among species when advice is elaborated (e.g., advice reflecting the conservation 
status and existing management objectives). 
356. 
The Chair noted these were helpful suggestions for members to keep in mind, observing that the 
stakes of Commission decisions were increasing, and members could always think about how to do 
business better. She stated there was a need to match information, advice and decisions, and a need to 
look at cases where the Commission did not receive advice on issues for which it asked for advice. 
357. 
The Commission adopted the SC14 Summary Report (WCPFC15-2018-SC14).  
 
9.2  
NC14 
358. 
The Chair referred the Commission to WCPFC15-2018-NC14: NC14 Summary Report (Revision 
1), during the discussion of the NC14 Summary Report and relevant recommendations. 
359. 
The United States stated it was encouraged by progress in undertaking the North Pacific albacore 
MSE, and that an MSE for Pacific bluefin tuna had been initiated. It noted these multi-year evaluations 
required resources from commission members and stated that a good plan to undertake the MSE was in 
place for North Pacific albacore, and that a plan was being formulated for Pacific bluefin tuna.  
360. 
The Commission adopted the report of NC14 (WCPFC15-2018-NC14).  
 
9.3  
TCC14  
361. 
The Commission was referred to WCPFC15-2018-24_rev1: Reference Paper for TCC14 
Recommendations for Agenda 9.3 – revision 1, which was prepared as a quick reference guide to the 
recommendations of TCC14 of relevance to WCPFC15 discussions. The full report of TCC14 was also 
tabled for consideration (WCPFC14-2018-TCC14: TCC14 Summary Report Final - issued 30 
November 2018). 
 
60  
  
9.3.1 
Regional Observer Programme 
362. 
The Commission agreed to adopt the TCC14 recommended amendments to CMM 2007-01, 
CMM 2018-05, Conservation and Management Measure for the Regional Observer Programme, 
(Attachment M).   
363. 
The Commission agreed to adopt the TCC14 recommended amendments to the ROP minimum 
standards (Attachment N).   
364. 
The Commission agreed that the TCC Observer-related working group would continue to operate 
electronically in 2019, led by Mr. Tom Graham (United States).  The TCC Observer-related working 
group was tasked to: 
a. 
Conduct further work, with input from the Secretariat and drawing from experiences 
using the Compliance Case File System and CCMs’ investigations, to determine what 
additional data fields, if any, should be added to the ROP minimum required data fields 
to support CCM investigations and more general compliance-related needs, such as 
flagging possible violations of Commission decisions to trigger CCM investigations or 
as part of the Compliance Monitoring Scheme (also see task (f)).  
b. 
More fully consider gaps in the capacity of ROP Providers to respond promptly and fully 
to requests for observer reports, such as in terms of human resources, training, and 
equipment, and explore ways to fill those gaps, including the possibility of a process 
through which ROP Providers may seek and receive financial or other support from the 
Commission to improve their capacity. 
c. 
Explore ways to support ROP Providers’ efforts to improve their debriefing processes 
such that observer reports can be more fully vetted and provided more quickly, including 
the possibility of giving higher priority to trips that are flagged through the Pre-
Notification Process (also see task (g)). 
d. 
Explore the potential utility of using the Compliance Case File System to facilitate and 
track CCM requests for observer reports. 
e. 
Explore whether pre-notifications can be sent by ROP Providers directly to the 
Secretariat without first having to be entered in the data service provider’s ROP database 
along with all the minimum required data fields. 
f. 
In concert with task (a), reconsider the summary data fields to better align with the 
Commission’s priorities in terms of compliance. 
g. 
In concert with task (c), explore the role debriefing can have in reviewing and filtering 
Trip Monitoring Summaries to make pre-notifications as efficient and useful as possible.  
h. 
Explore, as part of the Pre-Notification Process, the possibility of supplementing the 
WCPFC Observer Trip Monitoring Summary form with more detailed information from 
the observer (e.g., using “comments” pages) regarding any affirmative indications on the 
Summary form, such as more detailed information about the activities in question, which 
could support a CCM’s investigations of those activities, and/or references to particular 
sections/pages of the full observer report that could help narrow a CCM’s request for 
more information from the ROP Provider. 
i. 
Continue to develop mechanisms related to the provision of observer reports, taking into 
account the outcomes of the tasks listed above and the possible approaches described in 
WCPFC-TCC14-2018-14 and WCPFC-TCC14-2018-DP07.  
 
 
61  
  
9.3.2 
Transhipment 
365. 
The Chair noted that TCC14 held a lengthy discussion on transhipment, and that FFA member 
CCMs had submitted a paper on the issue to WCPFC15 (WCPFC15-2018-DP14: Transhipment 
Regulation: Review of CMM 2009-06).  
366. 
Tuvalu, on behalf of FFA members supported endorsement of the TCC report and its 
recommendations, in particular undertaking a review of CMM 2009-06 regarding transhipment as a 
priority in 2019. Noting that review will require detailed analysis, they offered to work with other CCMs 
on the terms of reference (TORs) and workplan for this issue.  
367. 
China stated that high seas transhipment was of vital importance for distant water fisheries, which 
is why China has participated in the establishment of transhipment regulations in several RFMOs, 
including WCPFC. It noted unregulated high sea transhipment may be used for IUU fishing activities, 
and regulation of high seas transhipment is the basis of CMM 2009-06, with 100% observer coverage 
on receiving vessels, and detailed procedures. China noted that CMM 2009-06 had been implemented 
for eight years, and it was time for WCPFC to review its effectiveness, with a view not to ban high seas 
transhipment, but to simplify procedures for the purpose of reducing the work load of the WCPFC 
Secretariat staff and flag CCMs in reference to other tuna RFMOs (e.g., IOTC and ICCAT), especially 
with regard to reviewing the need to “notify the information in Annex III to the Executive Director at 
least 36 hours prior to each transhipment”, as called for in para. 35a(iii). In addition, China noted that 
the obligations under para. 35a(i-v) were to be undertaken “as appropriate”, and that its interpretation 
of “as appropriate” was that it should not conduct the obligation assessment of the paragraph as it had 
been in the past. With respect to para. 35.a.(v) calling on CCMs to “Submit to the Commission a plan 
detailing what steps it is taking to encourage transhipment to occur in port in the future”, China stated 
its view that this was not mandatory, because of the phrase “as appropriate” in para. 35a. It stated that 
its policy was to encourage Chinese fishing companies to invest in and use ports in SIDS, and that 
Chinese authorities could provide financial assistance to Chinese companies for infrastructure 
improvement, noting they had several examples where this occurred. China noted that current regulation 
of high seas transhipment activity was in line with the relevant provisions and objectives of the WCPFC 
Convention, but stated that it had been unable to access an annual transhipment report from the WCPFC 
Secretariat, and thus were unaware what the current level of high sea transhipment was, and could not 
assess the overall trend. China requested that the Secretariat provide such a report for WCPFC16. 
368. 
Tuvalu reiterated its strong support for a review of the measure in 2019.  
369. 
The EU also supported a revision of the CMM on transhipment. It noted the various views held by 
members, and stated that transhipment is an open door for IUU fishing and other problems. The EU 
observed that its preference was to have no transhipment at sea, and that revising CMM 2009-06 would 
be difficult. The EU stated that, at a minimum, the level of observer coverage of transhipment should 
be increased.  
370. 
Japan thanked FFA for their views, and agreed that transhipment at sea should be discussed at 
TCC15. It supported China’s intervention, and stated that strengthening the monitoring of existing legal 
transhipment would prevent illegal activities. Japan suggested that the TCC review should focus on how 
to prevent illegal transhipment by carrier vessels without observers. 
371. 
RMI supported the intervention by Tuvalu and looked forward to working with other members on 
the issue. In response to a query regarding inclusion of the issue in the TCC workplan, the TCC-Vice 
Chair clarified that the issue had not been addressed in detail in the working group discussion on the 
TCC workplan.  
 
62  
  
372. 
Chinese Taipei supported a review of the measure in 2019, and also supported the positions 
expressed by Japan and China.  
373. 
Korea agreed that the measure be reviewed in 2019, noting that at-sea transhipment was an integral 
part of longline operations, especially for fishing fleets from Asia. It noted that the CMM was in the 
form of a recommendation rather than a regulation. Korea stated that very high penalties should be 
imposed in response to IUU activity but did not agree with a ban on at-sea transhipment.  
374. 
Papua New Guinea supported a review of the transhipment measure and asked that the Secretariat 
provide as much information as possible on transhipment on the high seas to support this.  
375. 
FSM supported the comments from FFA, RMI and PNG, noting the issue had been discussed for 
some time. Given the proposal to ban high seas transhipment, it agreed a review was warranted, both to 
strengthen the measure and to enable a more robust approach to monitoring and compliance, and 
supported inclusion of the issue in the TCC workplan.  
376. 
Canada supported holding a discussion on transhipment in 2019 and requested that the Secretariat 
provide an analysis of the existing situation with regard to transhipment, which should be included in 
the Secretariat’s workplan.  
377. 
The Commission discussed establishment of an electronic IWG to review CMM 2009-06, and 
agreed it would be co-chaired by RMI and the United States, with data support provided by the 
Secretariat as available. PNG noted the importance of information related to the VMS, HSBI, and catch 
in the high seas pockets. The Chair noted that data availability could impact the work of the IWG and 
highlighted the need for consultations between the Secretariat and the co-chairs regarding timing and 
resource availability.   
378. 
The Commission agreed to the TCC14 recommendation that the template provided in TCC14-
2018 RP03 Annex 3 be used by all applicable CCMs for their future reporting in Annual Report Part 
1, as per CMM 2009-06 paragraph 11 (Attachment O).   
379. 
The Commission agreed that TCC’s assessment of a CCM under paragraph 13 of CMM 2009-06 
will include that CCM’s report on observer coverage achieved for their carrier vessels conducting 
transhipment at sea in their Annual Report Part 2. 
380. 
The Commission agreed to conduct a review of the existing transhipment measure (CMM 2009-
06) in 2019, with the review to commence through an electronic intersessional working group, with 
the group led by two co-chairs, from RMI and the United States.   
 
9.3.3 
Commission VMS 
381. 
The Chair raised the issue of assessment of CMM 2014-02 paragraph 4. The TCC Chair stated that 
the issue arose at TCC14 during compliance analysis. Members expressed differing views on whether 
the measure was still relevant, but there was agreement that assessments could not be made against the 
obligation. The Chair stated that Commission should acknowledge that this presented difficulties for 
compliance assessment. The Chair stated that a resolution was not possible at WCPFC15. The 
Commission agreed not to assess the provision in 2019. 
382. 
The EU stated that a key output of TCC was the identification of areas where TCC faced difficulties 
in making compliance assessments. It noted the limited time available to follow-up on key findings from 
 
63  
  
TCC and encouraged members to consider a process to resolve such issues. The EU observed that 
TCC14 had difficulties assessing compliance with the CMM related to FAD closures, and indicated that 
there was a risk that this happens again at TCC15.  
383. 
The Chair stated that the CMR was adopted early during WCPFC15 in an effort to enable discussion 
on difficulties faced by TCC with respect to compliance monitoring. She noted that this could occur 
during regular reviews of CMMs, but stated that some issues did not come up for regular review. She 
stated that known problems must be addressed, and thanked the EU for its comments, and encouraged 
Members to consider the issue for resolution in the future.  
384. 
Canada agreed that the issue should be considered during the review and the update of the CMS and 
TCC workplan, and suggested that review and development of audit points would be of help. The TCC 
Chair stated that TCC had worked to address a number of simpler issues over a number of years, and 
that what remained were the more complicated obligations, for which it was more difficult for TCC to 
provide good recommendations. She noted that the revised CMS process may enable additional room 
for this review.  
385. 
The Commission agreed to extend the “Manual reporting in the event of ALC malfunction” 
requirement (Attachment 1 to the VMS SSPs) for a further two years (until 1 March 2021), taking 
into consideration the need for more timely provision of manual reports through automated online 
facilities or via electronic reporting where flag CCMs directly upload the required information.   
386. 
The Commission approved the addition to the WCPFC approved ALC/MTU list of the following 
ALC units: 
Model/Approved 
MTU 
Type 
Manufacturer 
Comm System 
Service Provider 
Skywave IDP-690 
ORBCOMM/Skywave 
INMARSAT 
ISATDATA PRO 
Skywave 
ORBCOMM ST6100 
ORBCOMM/Skywave 
INMARSAT 
ISATDATA PRO 
Skywave 
iTrac101B (iTrac II) 
MetOcean Telematics 
Iridium SBD 
MetOcean 
Telematics 
BB3 
SASCO 
Iridium (mini LEO) SASCO 
BB5 
SASCO 
Iridium (mini LEO) SASCO 
RomTrax Wifi 
Rom Communications 
Iridium SBD 
Rom 
Communications 
 
387. 
The Commission agreed to amend the WCPFC VMS SSPs, section 2 paragraph 7, so that 
ALC/MTU units can be included on the approved ALC/MTU list based on the Secretariat’s 
Assessment that any newly nominated ALC/MTU meets the minimum standards and following a 
 
64  
  
specified period after the circulation of this advice to all CCMs.  The replacement paragraph for 
section 2 paragraph 7 is provided below: 
7. The Secretariat will assess proposals for inclusion of additional ALC/MTU makes and models 
on this list from both CCMs and equipment manufacturers. The Secretariat shall include the 
ALC/MTU make or model being proposed on this list, if no CCM objects in writing within 30 
days of the Secretariat circulating notice of its intent to all CCMs, and, if in the Secretariat’s 
assessment, the ALC/MTU make or model meets the minimum standards for the Commission 
VMS as set out in Annex 1 of CMM 2014-02 (or its successor measure), the WCPFC SSPs, as 
relevant, by determining that the ALC/MTU make and model has the ability to successfully report 
to the Commission VMS, and by using the methodology established by the FFA with expenses 
for type approval processing to be borne by the proposing entity. Where the Secretariat concludes 
in its assessment that a proposed ALC/MTU make or model does not meet these requirements, 
or if a CCM objects in writing to the Secretariat's proposal to approve a new ALC/MTU make or 
model, the Secretariat within the annual report shall make recommendations regarding the 
proposed ALC/MTU make or model for the TCC’s consideration and the Commission’s 
approval. The Secretariat will recommend, as needed, to TCC the removal of units currently on 
the list of approved ALC/MTU makes and models that it has determined no longer meet the 
minimum standards set out in Annex 1 of CMM2014-02 (or successor measure), or do not have 
the ability to successfully report to the Commission VMS. If an ALC/MTU make and model is 
removed from the list of approved ALC/MTU types, flag CCMs will ensure that their fishing 
vessels replace non-type approved ALC/MTUs with approved ALC/MTUs by the next 
replacement of the ALC/MTU, but no later than three years after the Commission’s decision.   
388. 
The Commission approved the updated Standard Operating Procedures for the WCPFC VMS 
(Attachment P).   
389. 
The Commission agreed that CMM 2014-02 paragraph 4 should not be included in the list of 
obligations for review by the Compliance Monitoring Scheme in 2019.   
  
9.3.4 
Expanding the requirement for IMO Numbers 
390. 
The United States introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP05: Amendment to CMM 2017-05 to expand the 
requirement for IMO numbers, as recommended by TCC14, and expressed appreciation for the overall 
support for the proposal from Commission members. In reply to a query from Canada the United States 
stated that the proposed language was drawn from that used by the International Maritime Organisation 
(IMO) to avoid any conflicts with IMO Ship Identification Number Scheme. PNG, on behalf of FFA 
members, expressed their support for the proposal. 
391. 
The Philippines stated that at TCC14 its delegation asked for assistance from the proponent before 
adoption and noted that its concerns had been addressed.  
392. 
Pew, speaking also on behalf of EDF, IPNLF, ISSF and WWF, commended the Commission on its 
decision to expand the requirement for IMO numbers, which they stated would have a positive effect 
on transparency and the ability of fisheries managers and enforcement agencies to identify and trace 
vessels. They stated it would further strengthen the monitoring, control, and surveillance programme of 
the WCPFC and the efforts of coastal States and fishing States in fighting illegal, unreported and 
unregulated fishing. Obtaining IMO numbers for eligible vessels is becoming increasingly easy, as the 
managers of the IMO work closer with flag States to help them fill their data gaps and obtain numbers 
 
65  
  
for their fleet, in bulk. They stated that they were ready to assist delegates in accessing further 
information on obtaining IMO Numbers, or get in direct contact with the programme’s managers. 
393. 
The Commission agreed to amend CMM 2017-05 to expand the requirements for IMO numbers, 
and adopted CMM 2018-06 Conservation and Management Measure for WCPFC Record of Fishing 
Vessels and Authorisation to Fish (Attachment Q, WCPFC15-2018-DP05).   
 
9.3.5 
High seas boarding and inspection: authorities of the fishing vessel 
394. 
The United States introduced WCPFC15-2018-DP31: High seas boarding and inspection: 
authorities of the fishing vessel (originally notified under Circular 2018/74) regarding submission to the 
Executive Director of the name(s) and contact information of its Authorities of the Fishing Vessel for 
the purpose of CMM 2006-08, noting that 11 CCMs have not identified their relevant authorities.  
395. 
New Zealand, on behalf of FFA members, noted that the United States should review their proposal 
in accordance with CMM 2013-06 to evaluate its impact on SIDS. Japan thanked the United States for its 
submission, and stated that it could support the proposal, but stated that in some cases it had provided contact 
points, but these were not shared within the same country. Japan noted this was particularly a problem with 
respect to the United States, which sometimes used old contact points. It requested that the United States 
distribute the most updated contact points within its government.  
396. 
The Commission agreed that no later than 1 March 2019, any CCM that has not done so already 
shall submit to the Executive Director the name(s) and contact information of its Authorities of the 
Fishing Vessel for the purpose of CMM 2006-08.  If a CCM fails to do so by that date, the CCM’s 
primary official point of contact for the Commission shall be considered its Authorities of the Fishing 
Vessel, and the Executive Director will make that information available to CCMs on the public side 
of the WCPFC website, on the list of Authorities of the Fishing Vessel. 
 
9.3.6 
Update of TCC Workplan 
397. 
Mr Laurence Edwards (RMI), TCC Vice-Chair introduced the outcome of the SWG to update the 
TCC workplan: WCPFC15-2018-SWG TCC Work Plan: TCC Workplan 2019-2021.  He expressed 
his appreciation to the SWG participants and confirmed that the TCC Workplan was ready for adoption.    
398. 
The Commission adopted the TCC Workplan 2019-2021 (Attachment R, WCPFC15-2018-
SWG TCC Workplan). 
399. 
The Commission adopted the report of TCC14 (WCPFC15-2018-TCC14). 
 
9.4  
ERandEMWG3  
400. 
 The Chair referenced WCPFC15-2018-35: Reference paper for ERandEMWG3 recommendations 
for Agenda Item 9.4, taking the report as read.  
401. 
The EU stated it supported acceptance of the report, with the understanding that the planned work 
to include FLUX in the WCPFC ER and EM standards will continue to be progressed, to ensure notably 
that those already using FLUX will not face compatibility issues.  
 
66  
  
402. 
Vanuatu, on behalf of FFA members, supported the endorsement of the report and its outcomes, and 
suggested the working group next meet in 2020, consistent with the previous 2-year spacing of meetings, 
which would allow some important related work to be undertaken, such as Project 93.   
403. 
Korea thanked the ERandEMWG Chair, Kerry Smith (Australia), for her hard work. It noted that 
E-Monitoring could be a useful tool, and detailed some of the progress Korea was making at the national 
level on E-Reporting and E-Monitoring. Korea supported endorsement of the report.  
404. 
FSM, on behalf of the PNA, supported the statement made by Vanuatu and FFA members. The 
PNA thanked the working group chair for her efforts and the WCPFC Secretariat for the support they 
provided. They looked forward to contributing to the comprehensive data review proposed by the 
working group and now included in the SC draft workplan. PNA ministers have directed the 
development of a PNA Electronic Monitoring Program, which was reinforced by the recent call by the 
President of FSM to have all longline vessels subject to electronic monitoring by the year 2023. Building 
on the results of several trials of E-Monitoring technology on longliners in PNA waters, PNA members 
have started work with The Nature Conservancy on developing a PNA Electronic Monitoring Program. 
PNA members stated they that look forward to working with other CCMs in this important area, 
particularly to improve monitoring and scientific data collection on high seas distant water longliners. 
Update or revision of E-reporting SSPs  
405. 
The Commission agreed with respect to maintaining adopted standards, matters of substance 
(such as major changes or new proposals) shall be considered in a manner consistent with already 
established processes for new proposals. The Secretariat shall administer minor changes to the SSPs 
that reflect decisions of the Commission by circulating a draft to all CCMs advising that the change 
had been made and would come into effect on a date at least consistent with that in the SSPs. CCMs 
shall be provided the opportunity to raise concerns and if so, the change becomes a matter of 
substance and will be handled as such. 
Standards for E-reporting of high seas transhipment 
406. 
The Commission adopted the E-Reporting Standards for transhipment declarations and 
transhipment notices (WCPFC-2018-ERandEMWG03-03 Attachment 1, Attachment S). 
407. 
The Commission agreed that where transhipment declarations and transhipment notices are 
submitted to WCPFC in accordance with the E-Reporting Standards for transhipment declarations 
and transhipment notices, the following information will not be required: 
a. 
the observers signature;  
b. 
a unique document identifier;   
c. 
for the offloading vessel to supply data on the quantity of product already on board the 
receiving vessel;  
d. 
for the receiving vessel to supply data on the fishing gear that the offloading vessel used 
to take the fish; and  
e. 
for the receiving vessel to supply data on the quantity of product to be transhipped. 
408. 
The Commission also agreed to  
 
67  
  
a. add a footnote to Annex I of CMM 2009-06 that says “CCMs shall submit information required in 
Annex I or in accordance with E-reporting Standards for transhipment declarations and transhipment 
notices”; and 
b. add a footnote to Annex III of CMM 2009-06 that says “CCMs shall submit information required in 
Annex III or in accordance with E-reporting Standards for transhipment declarations and transhipment 
notices 
E-monitoring concept paper 
409. 
The Commission agreed to prioritising E-monitoring in areas where independent data collection 
and verification is currently low and asked SC15 and TCC15 for advice on priority areas. 
410. 
The Commission supported the continuation of intersessional work, led by the ERandEMWG 
Chair Kerry Smith (Australia) to further develop a draft conservation and management measure on 
E-monitoring for consideration by the Commission in 2020.  The ERandEMWG Chair was tasked to 
provide a report on progress to WCPFC16 in 2019.   
ERandEMWG3 Report 
411. 
The Commission adopted the ERandEMWG3 Summary Report (WCPFC15-2018-
ERandEMWG3). 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 10  —  COMPLIANCE MONITORING SCHEME  
10.1 
Consideration and Adoption of the Final Compliance Monitoring Report (CMR)  
412. 
The Commission considered the provisional CMR recommended by TCC14 through a small 
working group led by Alexa Cole (United States), the TCC Chair, which compiled the final CMR for 
adoption.  The TCC Chair provided a report on the SWG outcomes. The review of compliance by CCMs 
was undertaken against an updated priority list of Commission obligations agreed to at WCPFC14 for 
2018, and in accordance with CMM 2017-07. The current CMS does not require an overall assessment 
of each CCM, but only asks WCPFC to identify a compliance assessment for each specific obligation. 
Some obligations were assessed by WCPFC15 as “CMM Review”. The CMS working group noted that 
in some cases, such as in relation to CMM 2016-01, the obligations in question have already been 
revised in CMM 2017-01, but encouraged the Commission to consider whether additional revision is 
needed to resolve the difficulties in assessment. WCPFC15 assessed the following obligations as CMM 
Review: CMM 2014-02, para 4; and CMM 2016-01, paras 14, 16 and 18. There were two obligations 
that WCPFC15 was not able to assess due to a lack of consensus as to the compliance status. Therefore, 
the following obligations were not assessed: CMM 2016-04, para 3(2) (Japan, relating to a difference 
of opinion on the management period and associated reporting for the measure) and CMM 2016-01, 
para 22 (Philippines).  
413. 
Commission members and the Commission Chair expressed their appreciation to Alexa Cole for 
her work in chairing TCC.  
414. 
The Commission adopted the 2018 Final Compliance Monitoring Report (covering 2017 
activities) (WCPFC15-2018-finalCMR, Attachment T).  
 
68  
  
10.2 
Review of the Compliance Monitoring Scheme  
10.2.1 Report from the independent panel to review the Compliance Monitoring Scheme  
415. 
The Chair stated that WCPFC15-2018-26: Report from the independent panel to review the 
Compliance Monitoring Scheme was considered by the CMS IWG, as discussed in WCPFC15-2018-
27A, and highlighted by the CMS IWG Chair under Agenda Item 10.2.2.   
416. 
Australia, on behalf of FFA members, thanked the Review Panel for their comprehensive and 
valuable report that incorporated FFA members’ views. FFA members had reviewed the 
recommendations and recognised several of these in development of the FFA proposal on the draft CMS 
measure. As stated at TCC14, while the priority task for FFA members is development of the measure, 
some recommendations are distinct from the measure and it would be useful to progress these to support 
the CMS process and the broader work of the Commission. These relate to continued development of 
the Commission’s IMS to support implementation of the CMS and support MCS activities; continued 
development of training resources and learning aids for the IMS; and options to mitigate the impacts of 
unscheduled disruption to the Secretariat and trends analyses of capacity development information. 
These were discussed in the context of the revised TCC workplan and FFA members strongly 
recommended they be included in the workplan.  
417. 
The Chair noted that members should draw on the report’s recommendations. She expressed 
gratitude to the three members of the review panel for considering a very large body of work that should 
serve as a guide.  
418. 
The Commission noted the Report from the Independent Panel to review the Compliance 
Monitoring Scheme and agreed that the recommendations therein would serve as a reference for the 
Commissions consideration of future work to enhance the Compliance Monitoring Scheme 
(WCPFC15-2018-26).   
 
10.2.2 Report of the CMS-IWG, including Proposal for a CMM for the Compliance 
Monitoring Scheme 
419. 
The Commission considered the following papers related to the CMS: WCPFC15-2018-27A: 
Summary of CMS IWG comments on the report from the independent review of the CMS; WCPFC15-
2018-27B: Compilation of CMS IWG comments on the “Draft list of principles document”; and 
WCPFC15-2018-DP11_rev1: Comments on the working draft text for the Compliance Monitoring 
Scheme - revision 1.  
420. 
Mr Glen Joseph (RMI), as CMS-IWG Chair noted that the IWG was established at WCPFC14 to 
undertake two tasks: (i) to consider the report from the Independent Panel on the Review of the CMS 
(WCPFC15-2018-26), and (ii) to develop a proposed conservation and management measure for the 
CMS for consideration at WCPFC15. A summary of the views of the CMS-IWG on the Independent 
Panel report is contained in WCPFC15-2018-27A. The development of the proposed CMM for the 
CMS was progressed through submission of draft text from members, including a consolidated draft 
from FFA, and discussed at an informal meeting held in conjunction with SC14. A face-to-face meeting 
of the IWG was financially supported by New Zealand and was convened immediately prior to TCC14. 
Further work produced WCPFC15-2018-CMS IWG: Review of the WCPFC Compliance Monitoring 
Scheme — CMS IWG Working Draft Text – revision 3. The CMS-IWG welcomed further development 
of the proposal through the CMS SWG during WCPFC15.  
 
69  
  
421. 
Following further work, Glen Joseph (RMI) as the CMS SWG Chair, presented the sixth working 
draft. Members expressed support for the proposal, and the TCC Chair noted that it was a strong measure 
that would support the CMS. CCMs also acknowledged the efforts of the CMS-IWG Chair and all 
Commission members for engaging in a spirit of compromise and cooperation. 
422. 
FSM, on behalf of FFA members, stated that various areas of future work were contemplated by the 
proposed CMS measure: (i) the development of a risk-based framework to inform compliance 
assessments; (ii) the development of audit points for assessing CCMs' compliance with obligations; and 
(iii) a comprehensive review of the Commission's reporting requirements. They noted the work has been 
generally considered by FAC, with budgetary allocations made for CMS work. Two of these work areas 
have also been specifically included in the TCC Workplan. They noted the need to finalise any terms of 
reference for the work and suggested these be developed based on the draft terms of reference submitted 
by FFA in WCPFC15-2018-DP11_rev 1: Comments on the working draft text for the Compliance 
Monitoring Scheme. FSM also thanked the United States for its cooperation and engagement in 
developing the measure. 
423. 
The United States stated some of the future work identified in the new CMS CMM could be 
accomplished by Members without additional resource implications. In particular, the United States 
stated it would be happy to engage with other interested CCMs intersessionally on the development of 
audit points.  
424. 
The Commission adopted CMM 2018-07 Conservation and Management Measure for 
Compliance Monitoring Scheme (WCPFC15-2018-CMS IWG_04, Attachment U). 
425. 
The Commission noted that the measure includes an ambitious workplan for 2019 and that FAC 
had allocated some budgetary resources to support this work.  The Commission welcomed the 
expressions of interest from some Members to work with other Members during the intersessional 
period in 2019, to develop draft audit points for the assessment of obligations through the Compliance 
Monitoring Scheme.   
426. 
The Commission agreed that the list of obligations to be assessed in 2019 through the Compliance 
Monitoring Scheme should be based on the approved list from 2018 (Attachment V).   
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 11  — ADOPTION OF THE 2019 IUU VESSEL LIST  
427. 
 The Chair introduced WCPFC15-2018-28: WCPFC IUU Vessel List for 2019, which presented for 
the consideration of WCPFC15 the relevant information for a decision on the 2019 WCPFC IUU Vessel 
List.   
428. 
The Commission adopted the 2019 WCPFC IUU Vessel List (Attachment W).  
429. 
The Commission tasked the Executive Director to: 
a. seek the former flag CCM’s or non-CCM’s cooperation to provide any information on these 
vessels, including their respective master’s names and nationalities; 
b. write to all CCMs to provide information to the Commission if the vessels on the WCPFC IUU 
Vessel List are located, or if there are any known changes to name, flag or registered owner, 
 
70  
  
including any action that port states have taken such as denial of port entry and services to those 
vessels or any information from cannery State of any landings made by these vessels;  
c. write a letter to other RFMOs and other relevant bodies conveying this same message for 
cooperation to locate these vessels; and  
d. promptly reported any information received to CCMs. 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 12  — REPORT OF THE TWELFTH ANNUAL SESSION OF THE 
FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION COMMITTEE  
12.1 
Report of the Twelfth Finance and Administration Committee  
430. 
The Commission considered the report of FAC12 (WCPFC15-2018-FAC12-14). The FAC co-
Chair Magele Etuati Ropeti (Samoa) presented the FAC report, and thanked CCMs who participated in 
the FAC sessions held on the 9th, 12th, 13th and 14th of December. The main recommendations included: 
that a supplementary retirement plan for locally engaged staff be implemented in 2019; support for the 
Secretariat’s efforts to develop and implement an environmental policy; approval of the terms of 
reference and budget for a consultancy to undertake a building survey and develop a maintenance plan 
for the Commission buildings; and agreement to keep the SRF at a target base level of US$150,000, 
which is equivalent to ~2% of CCM contributions, to support implementation of the SIP and other needs 
as identified by developing States parties. 
431. 
Australia stated that FFA members requested that US$100,000 amount be set aside in a dedicated 
line item in the TCC budget for future CMS work. The Chair confirmed that this would be done by the 
Secretariat. 
432. 
PNG inquired whether the observer budget for cross endorsements had an allocation to include cost 
recovery in the future. The Secretariat stated that cost recovery had been discussed, but the Secretariat 
had not considered this as a tasking for the next session of the FAC. RMI expressed agreement with 
PNG and asked that the intention to arrange for full future cost recovery be indicated. The United States 
recalled that it had offered to fund this through voluntary contributions and stated it would like to see 
what funds it could arrange to help continue the training. The United States proposed that the issue and 
any suggestions regarding cost recovery be raised at FAC13.  
 
12.2 
Budget Approval for 2019 and Indicative Budgets for 2020 and 2021  
433. 
The Commission adopted the report of the Twelfth Session of the FAC (WCPFC15-2018-
FAC12), including the 2019 budget of $8,041,652 and indicative budgets for 2020 and 2021 of 
$7,966,937 and $8,092,140, respectively (Attachments X). 
434. 
The Commission agreed that a new row should be included in Part 2.3 titled “CMS Future Work” 
with an amount of $100,000 in 2019, that is transferred from Sub-Item 2.3 “Information Management 
System” in 2019.  Note 6 should also be shifted to be notation for the “CMS Future Work” budget 
line.   
435. 
The final adopted 2019 budget and Annexes are provided in (Attachment Y).   
 
 
71  
  
AGENDA ITEM 13  — ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS  
13.1 
Corporate Plan  
436. 
The Executive Director introduced WCPFC15-2018-29: Draft medium-term corporate plan, as 
required by WCPFC14. He explained that in 2016 and 2017, the Commission was engaged in 
developing a new long-term planning framework, and an annual short-term planning document. 
Following significant work, at WCPFC14 the Commission was unable to agree on a way forward for 
the strategic plan, so decided on a medium-term corporate plan. But when it agreed on the tasking, the 
Commission provided little instruction in terms of process and key objectives, and no budget for its 
development. The draft Corporate Plan in WCPFC15-2018-29 is the Secretariat’s best effort to provide 
a framework to assist the Commission and the Secretariat in organizing its work. In the absence of 
consultations with members, the Secretariat relied on the materials gathered during the consultations 
with members and stakeholders in 2016 when developing the draft Strategic Plan, as a reflection of 
some of the views and perspectives of Commission members and stakeholders. Accordingly, the goals 
and guiding objectives for the Medium-Term Corporate Plan were adapted and are refinements of those 
in the draft Strategic Plan. The plan is an organic and living document, subject to regular renewal and 
refreshment. A short-term consultancy was involved. The Executive Director noted he was seeking 
guidance on the process to further progress development of the plan, which needs to benefit from input 
from stakeholders and members. He stated he was encouraged that FAC sought to develop terms of 
reference for that process. 
437. 
The EU suggested holding consultations intersessionally, and noted it was important to consider the 
cost implications of the plan. It suggested that regarding Goal 6 of the plan (Enhance the transparency 
and effectiveness of Commission governance and operations) the EU would like to have language added 
to ensure that relevant aspects of UNCLOS and the UN FSA are implemented, with provisions that 
apply to WCPFC applied through the Commission’s daily work.  
438. 
New Zealand, on behalf of FFA members, noted with concern that the matter had been before the 
annual meeting for the past two sessions without substantive progress.  They stated their concern to 
ensure the agenda item was not subject to prolonged discussion with little real value. They stated their 
view that there were two options: 
a.        Abandon the Corporate Plan, and continue to run the Commission on a year-to-year basis as 
necessary to implement the Convention, its CMMs, and any subsidiary body workplans formally 
adopted by the Commission (this is not an ideal option); and 
b.       Task the WCPFC Secretariat to work with members to refine a draft Corporate Plan focusing 
on the Secretariat, and bring it back to WCPFC16 next year for adoption. 
FFA members’ view is that the Commission needs to provide guidance to the Secretariat on how to 
progress development of the Plan, and that FFA members see clear value in having a Corporate Plan 
focussing on the work of the Secretariat. In an effort to progress the issue, a number of members 
developed draft terms of reference for the development of a Corporate Plan for the Secretariat 
(WCPFC15-2018-FAC12-13). FAC received the report positively but there has been no opportunity to 
seek more formal agreement on the terms of reference. However, FFA members consider there is a need 
for a Corporate Plan for the Secretariat, developed in consultation with Members.  
439. 
Noting that some members needed further time to consider the terms of reference, the Commission 
agreed to request that the Executive Director should continue to progress the draft intersessionally 
during 2019. 
 
72  
  
440. 
The Commission directed the Executive Director to progress, intersessionally with interested 
CCMs, the further development of the draft Medium-Term Corporate Plan (WCPFC15-2018-29) to 
guide the work of the Secretariat and to report back to WCPFC16. 
 
13.2 
Kobe Process  
441. 
The Executive Director presented WCPFC15-2018-30: Kobe Process, which includes (as 
Attachment A) a concept note from the Chair of the Steering Committee of the Kobe process, which 
last met in in July in the margins of the meeting of the FAO Committee on Fisheries. The Executive 
Director noted that the Chair of the Steering Committee was present at WCPFC15. The Executive 
Director provided a background on the Kobe Process, which is intended to provide a platform for 
cooperation among the five tuna RFMOs.  
442. 
The Chair of the Kobe Process Steering Committee stated that cooperation between RFMOs was 
useful where common challenges exist, where cooperation can be beneficial, and where such 
cooperation does not impinge on autonomy. He briefly reviewed the history of the Kobe Process, and 
the current effort to determine the correct format, scale and focus for cooperation. He stated the Concept 
Note proposed three main categories: (i) cooperation, exchange of information and coordination among 
RFMO secretariats (members of the Kobe Process steering committee); (ii) organisation of meetings of 
existing or new working groups covering specific topics (e.g., FADs, MSE, and bycatch), with open 
participation and voluntary contributions; and (iii) organisation of new large-scale meetings, which he 
noted could only work if properly prepared, and which are accompanied by many reservations. He 
encouraged members to discuss the options, and asked the Commission to allow the Chair and Executive 
Director to work further on these issues. 
443. 
Japan stated that it had indicated at meetings of other RFMOs where it is a member that Japan very 
much supported cooperation among RFMOs, and the organisation of small and medium-sized meetings 
that focus on specific themes, such as MSE, which is a very new and emerging issue. It expressed 
reservations regarding large-scale meetings that inevitably cover a wide range of issues, including some 
that are very controversial, and noted the severe conflicts that develop in those settings were not helpful.  
444. 
Tokelau, on behalf of FFA members, thanked the members of the Steering Committee of the Kobe 
Process for bringing forward some suggestions regarding the future work of the tuna RFMOs. They 
noted FFA members have always recognised the potential benefits of a process that allows the tuna 
RFMOs to learn from each other's successes by facilitating better information sharing and cooperation. 
However, they stated they were also very aware of the risks that the global process can pose for FFA 
members. They stated they have worked hard in the WCPFC to establish management frameworks that 
recognise the sovereign rights and aspirations of the SIDS in the Pacific, in whose EEZs the vast 
majority of WCPO catch is taken. They stated they are wary of any process that could undermine the 
progress made in the region, and stated that unfortunately, the earlier Kobe process did exactly that. 
They also raised the issue of the cost of engaging in additional processes on top of the already congested 
schedule of regional meetings and deadlines. They stated they had yet to be convinced that the potential 
benefits of reinvigorating the Kobe process will outweigh the costs.  
445. 
Canada stated it did not participate in the earlier high-level sessions of the Kobe Process, and 
understood the current smaller-scale meetings seemed to have good results. It noted that it was 
unfortunate it was being raised at the conclusion of WCPFC15 and stated it did not fully understand the 
concerns of FFA members. Canada noted the issue was to how to make the process work better, and 
suggested that sharing specific practices and experiences (e.g., on managing transhipment at sea) could 
 
73  
  
be very useful among tuna RFMOs. Canada supported involvement in the Kobe process, while 
expressing reluctance regarding high-level meetings.  
446. 
The EU thanked the presenters, noting the Kobe Process is important, and creates synergies and 
enhances complementarities between RFMOs. It suggested the process offered only benefits to 
members. Based on the Concept Note, the EU suggested meetings and working groups offered the most 
value in the short and medium term. It expressed regret that the WCPFC was not represented in the 2018 
Tuna RFMO FAD working group meeting, and stated this was an essential subject for WCPFC 
members. The EU expressed less interest in the large-scale meetings, but said they may be useful at 
some time. It saw no risks for any members of the WCPFC in participation, noting that the rights of 
coastal states were not discussed at the level being proposed, and that the Kobe Process could in any 
case only reinforce these rights. Furthermore, the EU stated that issues could be addressed in a manner 
to support developing states throughout the different RFMOs, which offered benefits and synergies 
rather than risks. 
447. 
The United States stated it would be most interested in working group meetings, which provide an 
opportunity for technical cooperation. It stated it would like to see support from all RFMOs. 
448. 
Australia, on behalf of FFA members, stated they could support ongoing meetings of the steering 
committee, if these were restricted to the Chairs and directors of the tuna RFMOs, and if they developed 
suggestions for areas of work where coordination and cooperation across the tuna RFMOs could lead to 
tangible outcomes. It does not support proposals for large global omnibus meetings of all tuna RFMO 
members as seen under previous iterations of the Kobe Process. Australia asked that the WCPFC 
Executive Director communicate this position when discussing the potential viability of reigniting the 
Kobe Process, either in the Kobe Steering Committee or in other forums such as the network of Regional 
Fisheries Bodies. 
449. 
The EU requested that WCPFC be represented at the 2019 Tuna RFMO FAD working group 
meeting.   
450. 
The Commission noted the update on the Kobe Process (WCPFC15-2018-30).  
451. 
The Commission supported continued involvement by the Commission Chair and the Executive 
Director in meetings of the Kobe Process Steering Committee, and the participation in a 2019 meeting of 
the joint tuna RFMO FAD Working Group by the WCPFC FAD-IWG Chair and a member of the WCPFC 
Secretariat.  
 
13.3 
Research Projects  
13.3.1 ABNJ Project  
452. 
Janne Fogelgren (FAO ABNJ Tuna Project) introduced WCPFC15-2018-31: Report to WCPFC on 
Progress of the Project Sustainable Management of Tuna Fisheries and Biodiversity Conservation in 
the ABNJ. He thanked FAO’s partners in the region (WCPFC, FFA, SPC, IATTC, and the government 
of Fiji), as well as ISSF, WWF and Birdlife International for their collaboration. FAO highlighted the 
large, successful electronic monitoring and surveillance program in Fiji, involving over 50 vessels, and 
a new project (to begin in 2019) in conjunction with ISSF to provide training and undertake trials on 
biodegradable FADs in the WCPO.  They also noted the possible interest from The Global Environment 
Facility (GEF) in supporting a follow-up ABNJ project.  
 
74  
  
453. 
New Zealand, on behalf of FFA members, acknowledged many of the good outcomes of the various 
ABNJ tuna projects, particularly in the areas of bycatch mitigation and data improvement. They 
supported the proposed extension of the Common Oceans project through December 2019 and the 
associated work programme. Regarding the proposed Phase 2 of the ABNJ Project, FFA members 
stressed the need for any project development to be consistent with, and support, the WCPFC’s 
priorities. They noted with disappointment that a Phase 2 planning meeting was scheduled at the same 
time as WCPFC15. They stated it was critical that the Commission was meaningfully engaged with the 
project coordinators to ensure that the WCPFC and the priorities of its CCMs are taken into account.  
454. 
The EU supported the continuation of the project, and noted its contributions, especially in the area 
of bycatch mitigation. It also acknowledged the commitment and quality of the work of the coordinator 
of the project, Dr S. Clark, that have been instrumental in achieving the key objectives of the first phase 
of the project and allowing WCPFC to be a leading RFMO in terms of conservation and management 
of by catch species 
455. 
Nauru on behalf of the PNA, fully supported the statement made by New Zealand on behalf of FFA 
members that any future ABNJ project must support rather than drive the objectives of WCPFC SIDS.  
They stated that while the ABNJ project has provided valuable input in many areas, it has also 
introduced some anomalies, such as the huge amount of time spent on shark and other bycatch issues at 
SC. Any future ABNJ project must be mindful of GEF’s purpose, which is to assist developing countries 
and countries with economies in transition to achieve environmental outcomes and fulfil their 
international obligations. The purpose of GEF is not simply to supplement RFMO funding. They stated 
that the ABNJ project has delivered a range of benefits to WCPFC SIDS, but has also invested in a wide 
range of activities that are very loosely related to that overall purpose. They noted they will convey 
these views throughout the design phase, but requested that the Executive Director and all CCMs also 
be mindful of this when the design team conducts its consultation. 
456. 
The United States echoed the sentiments expressed by other members, and noted it appreciated the 
hard work done by the project and encouraged the Secretariat to work with ABNJ in the design of a 
phase 2.  
457. 
The Commission noted the updates on Progress of the Project Sustainable Management of Tuna 
Fisheries and Biodiversity Conservation in the ABNJ (WCPFC15-2018-31). 
 
13.3.2 Pacific Tuna Tagging Project  
458. 
J. Hampton (SPC) introduced WCPFC15-2018-32: Pacific Tuna Tagging Programme, noting that 
the programme remains an important part of the Commission’s science programme, and undertakes tuna 
tagging cruises each year. In 2018 the programme targeted bigeye tuna in the western tropical Pacific, 
and in 2019 the focus will be on skipjack within the warm pool. He noted the cooperation from many 
CCMs, including in assisting with the complex task of tag recovery, and noted in particular the observer 
programmes and fishery administrations that provide assistance with recovery.  
459. 
Korea thanked SPC and the Secretariat and offered congratulations on the voyage conducted in 
2017 targeting skipjack. Korea expressed its satisfaction that it could support the tagging program 
through voluntary contributions, which will continue through 2021.   
460. 
RMI, on behalf of FFA members, thanked SPC for the report. They noted they had strongly 
supported the project at SC14, and value it highly because the tuna tagging data is becoming increasingly 
important in reducing the uncertainty in tropical assessments, and in providing an index of abundance 
 
75  
  
for the most valuable stock in the region, as well as helping with ageing, and migration and connectivity 
studies. 
461. 
The Commission noted the updates on the Pacific Tuna Tagging Project (WCPFC15-2018-32). 
 
13.3.3 WCPFC Tissue Bank – application of the Nagoya Protocol  
462. 
J. Hampton (SPC) introduced WCPFC15-2018-33: Project 35b: WCPFC Tuna Tissue Bank, stating 
that it is an important science activity of the Commission that provides important biological inputs to 
the stock assessments. Implementation of the Nagoya protocol involves access to and sharing of genetic 
resources, and SPC, the Secretariat and the WCPFC Legal Adviser are working to assess any associated 
legal issues and will provide SC and the Commission with options to address any that arise.  
463. 
Kiribati on behalf of FFA members, stated they supported Project 35b at SC14, including the 
recommendations to maintain and enhance the WCPFC Tissue Bank and its associated workplan and 
budget for 2019. They noted that the work is extremely important to many components of the 
Commission’s work, particularly regarding the improvement of stock assessments. In addition, they 
highlighted the valuable work being completed by CCMs’ observers and port samplers that are trained 
and tasked with collecting the biological samples, stating that their contribution is essential to the 
ongoing success of the Commission’s work. 
464. 
The United States supported the suggestion to seek technical advice to better understand the issues 
associated with the tissue bank and stated it would be happy to engage with the Secretariat and SPC, 
possibly through SC, to ensure any concerns it had were addressed.  
465. 
The Commission noted the updates on Project 35b: WCPFC Tuna Tissue Bank (WCPFC15-
2018-33). 
 
13.3.4 WPEA Project   
466. 
Dr SungKwon Soh (WCPFC Science Manager) introduced WCPFC15-2018-34: Update on the 
WPEA Project, which is active in Indonesia, the Philippines and Viet Nam. The project will be 
completed in April 2019.  The third phase WPEA project (Western Pacific East Asia Improved Tuna 
Monitoring Activity) funded by New Zealand is expected to be fully implemented in 2019 and scheduled 
for completion in 2022. Key activities of the current WPEA project include: 
a) collection of tuna catch data and estimation of national annual tuna catch by species and by gear; 
b) capacity building in science; 
c) development of guidelines on adaptive management and monitoring of HMS to address climate 
change; 
d) market-based sustainability, including characterizing tuna supply chain in each country and 
establishing certification/eco-labeling systems; 
e) development of reference points and harvest control rules at national level; 
f) application of an EAFM to selected tuna fisheries; 
g) updating of national tuna management plans, and national tuna fishery profiles; and  
h) review of legal, policy and institutional arrangements in line with WCPFC requirements. 
 
76  
  
467. 
Tuvalu, on behalf of FFA members, stated that the WPEA project has provided the Commission 
with very valuable data on previously unavailable catch landings in Indonesia, Philippines and Viet 
Nam. They noted the project is now entering its third iteration with funding from New Zealand after 
two cycles of support under the GEF International Waters Initiative, and that data from this project is 
crucial to the ongoing refinement of stock assessment models prepared by SPC. They also noted a need 
to continue to improve data collection, especially in artisanal fisheries, and asked the countries involved 
to further enhance and resource this project. 
468. 
Indonesia thanked WCPFC for supporting the project, noting the positive outcomes, both for 
Indonesia and other countries. It noted the development of a tuna management plan and harvest strategy 
work in its waters that will be compatible with the harvest strategy being developed for the WCPO. 
Indonesia also noted outputs in progress, and the increase in the capacity of its scientists and managers. 
Indonesia acknowledged the support from New Zealand for the third phase of the project. 
469. 
The Philippines thanked the Commission, UNDP, SPC and the Secretariat for their support through 
the project. The Philippines looked forward to continuing cooperation with the Commission, and 
thanked New Zealand for its support.  
470. 
Viet Nam stated that it was happy to be present and able to express its thanks to WCPFC for its help 
in implementing the project, stating its fisheries management has improved and the project helped in 
revising Viet Nam’s fisheries law. The project also helped build capacity to collect fishery data and 
increase capacity in fisheries management. Viet Nam signalled its readiness to implement the project 
funded by New Zealand, which was just approved by its government. Viet Nam reiterated their interest 
in being a full member of WCPFC in the future. 
471. 
The Commission noted the updates on the WPEA Project (WCPFC15-2018-34). 
 
13.4 
Election of Officers  
472. 
The Commission made a number of appointments to Commission positions commencing in 2019: 
a) Ms. Jung-re Riley Kim (Korea) was appointed as WCPFC Chair, and Dr. Josie Tamata (Niue) 
as WCPFC Vice-Chair; 
b) Mr. Jonathan Kidu (PNG) was appointed as a new FAC Co-Chair;  
c) Mr. Laurence Edwards (RMI) was appointed as TCC Chair, and Dr. Robert Day (Canada) as 
TCC Vice-Chair; and  
d) Mr. Masanori Miyahara (Japan) was appointed as NC Chair, and Mr. Michael Tosatto 
(United States) as NC Vice-Chair. 
473. 
There were no nominations for SC vice-chair, so the position will remain vacant during 2019. 
474. 
In support of 2019 Intersessional Working Group activities, to be progressed electronically, the 
Commission confirmed the following: 
a) Mr. Tom Graham (United States) would continue to lead the TCC Observer-related IWG; 
 
77  
  
b) Ms. Sarah Williams (New Zealand) would continue to lead the South Pacific Albacore 
Roapmap IWG; 
c) Ms. Kerry Smith (Australia) would continue to lead the ERandEMWG; and 
d) Mr. Sam Lanwi (RMI) and Dr. Alex Kahl (United States) would co-chair the Transhipment 
Review IWG.   
 
13.5 
Future Meetings  
475. 
The Chair noted that PNG had offered to host WCPFC16, which was confirmed by PNG.  
476. 
Korea thanked PNG for offering to host WCPFC16, while expressing concerns regarding the high 
accommodation cost and security issues. Korea announced it would be making a financial contribution 
to help support participation by SIDS and territories at WCPFC16. Korea stated that it would consider 
how the contribution would be made but were considering a contribution to the SRF.  
477. 
PNG acknowledged Korea’s concerns, and stated these were being addressed, and that PNG would 
be communicating with the Secretariat as details were finalised.   
478. 
Vanuatu supported PNG’s interest in hosting WCPFC16, stating it had displayed the capacity to 
host large meetings.  
479. 
RMI thanked Korea for its offer of support to SIDS and territories. 
 
480. 
In 2019, the Commission agreed that:  
a) SC15 would be held on Monday 12th – Tuesday 20th August 2019 in Pohnpei;3  
b) NC15 would be held on Monday 2nd – Friday 6th September 2019 in Portland Oregon, USA; 
c) TCC15 would be held on Wednesday 25th September – Tuesday 1st October 2019 in Pohnpei; 
d) WCPFC16 would be held on Thursday 5th December – Wednesday 11th December in Port Moresby, 
PNG, with FAC13 and the HOD meeting held immediately prior to WCPFC16, on Wednesday, 4th 
December.   
 
AGENDA ITEM 14  — OTHER MATTERS  
481. 
No other matters were raised for discussion at WCPFC15. 
AGENDA ITEM 15  — SUMMARY REPORT OF THE WCPFC15  
482. 
The Chair outlined the process for adoption of the Summary Report for WCPFC15, with an 
outcomes document containing agreed decision points to be circulated to the Commission within seven 
                                                      
3 As agreed by the Commission intersessionally on 22 February 2019 (WCPFC Circular 2019/10) 
 
78  
  
working days following the close of the annual session, and the draft Summary Report to be provided 
as soon as possible. CCMs would be given thirty working days after circulation of the draft Summary 
Report to provide any changes. The complete Summary Report would be finalised intersessionally and 
posted on the Commission website; representatives would be advised accordingly.   
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 16  — CLOSE OF MEETING  
483. 
Samoa spoke on behalf of FFA members, the FFA Director-General and FFA Secretariat in thanking 
the Commission Chair for her work over the last 4 years. They stated she had guided the Commission 
well through sometimes turbulent seas. Samoa’s comments were echoed by many of the members and 
observers present, who also wished the Chair every success in her next endeavours. They also 
congratulated the Vice-Chair on being confirmed as Chair beginning in 2019.  
484. 
The Executive Director voiced his gratitude for the Chair’s leadership and guidance in the work of 
the Commission, noting that in his various roles in many Pacific organisations he had never worked 
with a Chair who was as engaging, inspiring and easy to work with. He thanked the Chair for being a 
tremendous leader and a good friend to the Secretariat, and assured the incoming Chair that the 
Secretariat would offer her the same support and cooperation. 
485. 
The Chair said that to call 2018 a busy year would be an understatement, but observed WCPFC15 
was finishing before midnight. She thanked members for working through long days and late into the 
night, and for making good progress and delivering good outcomes to the Commission. She noted that 
it was a testimony to how important the Commission is, and why participants do the work. The Chair 
thanked the United States and Hawaii for welcoming the Commission to Honolulu, and expressed the 
hope that members would have the opportunity to enjoy Honolulu before returning home. She noted the 
lack of agreement on the harvest strategy dialogue and a consolidated sharks measure, but said that 
engagement on these issues would continue until agreement is reached. She noted the excellent progress 
on many other issues, including adopting a strong tropical tuna measure and other important CMMs, 
including a TRP for South Pacific albacore. She congratulated all CCMs for their hard work that 
culminated in these outcomes. She thanked CCMs for their warm appreciation, and the Executive 
Director and the Secretariat staff, as well as SPC, for their excellent support. She wished everyone 
success and expressed her full confidence in the incoming Chair.  
486. 
The meeting closed at 9:25 pm on Friday, 14 December 2018.    
 
 