The Commission for the Conservation and Management of  
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean 
 
 
Fourteenth Regular Session of the Commission  
Manila, Philippines 
3 - 7 December 2017 
 
SUMMARY REPORT 
 
AGENDA ITEM 1 – OPENING OF THE MEETING 
1. The Fourteenth Regular Session of the Commission for the Conservation and Management of 
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPFC14) took place from 
3 - 7 December 2017 in Manila, Philippines. 
2. The following Members and Participating Territories attended WCPFC14: American Samoa, 
Australia, Canada, the People’s Republic of China, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands 
(CNMI), the Cook Islands, the European Union (EU), the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), Fiji, 
France, French Polynesia, Guam, Indonesia, Japan, Kiribati, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of 
the Marshall Islands (RMI), Nauru, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea 
(PNG), the Philippines, Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Chinese Taipei, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, the 
United States of America (USA) and Vanuatu.   
3. The following non-party countries attended WCPFC14 as Cooperating Non-Members (CNMs): 
Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Panama, Thailand and Vietnam. 
4. Observers from the following governmental and inter-governmental organizations (IGOs) attended 
WCPFC14:  Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC), Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries 
Agency (FFA), International Scientific Committee For Tuna And Tuna Like Species In The Northern 
Pacific Ocean (ISC), Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS), the Parties to the Nauru Agreement 
(PNA), the Pacific Community (SPC), the Secretariat for the Pacific Regional Environment Programme 
(SPREP), Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), and The World Bank.  
5. Observers from the following non-governmental organizations (NGOs) attended WCPFC14: 
American Tunaboat Association (ATA), Australian National Centre for Ocean Resources and Security 
(ANCORS), Centre for the Blue Economy (CEB), Earth Island Institute, Environmental Defense Fund 
(EDF), Greenpeace, International Environmental Law Project (IELP), International Pole and Line 
Foundation (IPNLF),  International Seafood Sustainability Foundation (ISSF), the Marine Stewardship 
Council (MSC), Ocean Friends Against Driftnets (OFAD), Organization for the Promotion of 
Responsible Tuna Fisheries (OPRT), Pacific Island Tuna Industry Association (PITIA), the Pew 
Charitable Trusts (PEW), Seafood Legacy, Sustainable Fisheries Partnership (SFP) Foundation, The 
Nature Conservancy (TNC), World Tuna Purse Seine Organization (WTPO), and World Wide Fund 
for Nature (WWF).   
6. A full list of all participants is provided in Attachment A. 
7. The Commission Chair Madam Rhea Moss-Christian (Marshall Islands) called the session to order 
at 9am on Sunday 3rd December 2017. 
8 
8. The Under Secretary for Fisheries of the Government of the Philippines and Director of the Bureau 
of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR); Commodore Eduardo B Gongona warmly welcomed to 
Manila, Philippines the delegates to the 14th session of the Commission in Manila. He thanked the 
Commission for the trust in permitting the Philippines to host the meeting for the second time. He also 
acknowledged and thanked their partners in particular the Philippines tuna industry for their 
contributions to the hosting arrangements and wished all delegates a successful meeting and stay in the 
Philippines.  
9. Secretary Emmanuel F. Pinol of the Department of Agriculture, Government of the Philippines, 
presented the keynote address. He acknowledged the presence of ministers from member governments 
and thanked the Commission for the privilege accorded to the Philippines who was proud to host the 
WCPFC for a second time. The Secretary emphasised the importance of fisheries to the economy, food 
security and livelihood of the people of the Philippines. He outlined the Philippines government 
initiatives and developments to protect and ensure the long-term conservation and management of its 
fisheries resources including from inland, inshore and offshore. They include implementation of a 
national shark management plan including declaration of whale shark as a protected species; continual 
improvements of national tuna stock assessment; catch documentation traceability scheme; enhanced 
monitoring, control and surveillance tools including a national vessel monitoring scheme and a national 
observer programme that provide for 100% coverage for purse seiners operating in the HSP1; the 
Philippine RICE initiative; and the Clean and Abundance Seas initiative that provide for substantial 
monetary awards to local governments that maintain the cleanest and well managed coastline and 
marine resources. The Secretary reaffirmed the Philippines commitment to observe and implement 
fully the Commission’s conservation and management measures and the fight against IUU fishing. 
Although he will not remain for the rest of the meeting because of his commitment at an international 
trade negotiation meeting the Philippines delegation looked forward to hearing and exchanging best 
practices in the Commission’s efforts to conserve and effectively manage tuna and highly migratory 
fish stocks of the WCPO. He concluded his address by wishing delegates success and enjoyable stay 
and a greeting of “may the fish be with you”.  
10. The Commission Chair, Ms Rhea Moss-Christian, in her opening remarks spoke of the need for 
delegates to be mindful of the kind of legacy they would pass on to future generations as a consequence 
of the actions they take. As current custodian of tuna management delegates must accept the 
responsibility to develop outcomes that do more than address the immediate challenges. To accept 
short-term solutions is to abrogate the responsibility of a responsible custodian. She emphasized the 
consensus nature of the Commission and reminded that consensus means general agreement as a basis 
that all can live with, it does not mean that some members get all of what they want and others get just 
a little. So, the need to accept that the outcomes of the Commission must be a result of compromises 
as the Commission Convention dictates that only through collective efforts will there be collective 
gains. The Chair also provided a brief outline of the ongoing key issues that were carried over from the 
last meeting including harvest strategy, the compliance monitoring scheme, bycatch species, the 
tropical tuna measure and the south Pacific albacore tuna. The full statement of the Chair is in 
Attachment B.   
11. The WCPFC Executive Director, Feleti P Teo, OBE, thanked Secretary Pinol for his presence and 
address and sharing some insightful perspectives that will surely provide inspiration to the deliberations 
of the Commission.  He noted that the Commission had a busy year, in addition to the annual sessions 
of its subsidiary bodies, the Commission also convened three intersessional sessions to progress the 
development and negotiations of two major tuna measures one for the tropical tunas (bigeye, skipjack 
and yellowfin) and the other for the South Pacific albacore. These had been difficult negotiations 
because of the multifaceted character of the fisheries and because of the divergent and entrenched 
positions of stakeholders in respect of those fisheries.  He recalled that the Commission had been able 
to reach agreement on equally difficult issues in the past, and hoped that the Commission would again 
rise to the occasion and again make the hard decisions needed mindful of the long-term sustainability 
9 
of the fisheries.  In noting the initiation of the independent review of the compliance monitoring 
scheme, he mentioned the sizable volume of work for the Secretariat and the Technical Compliance 
Committee generated by the compliance monitoring scheme and hoped that the review would find 
recommendations to streamline the operation of the scheme and make it more efficient and effective 
mindful of the capacity and resources limitations of the Commission and the Secretariat. The full text 
of the Executive Director’s statement is in Attachment C. 
1.1 
Adoption of agenda 
12. After a brief discussion of the agenda (WCPFC14-2017-01_rev1), it was agreed that the USA 
would present its paper on membership process under agenda item 3.4.   
13. The agenda was adopted as amended (Attachment D).  
1.2 
Statements from Members and Participating Territories 
14. The Chair invited Members and Participating Territories who wish to make opening statements to 
do so and encouraged those with written statements to provide copies to the Secretariat. 
15. The Republic of Korea thanked the Secretariat for the arrangements for the meeting and the host 
country for the magnificent hospitality. He acknowledged that fisheries resources are limited and 
stressed importance of ensuring their sustainability in accordance with the principles of the 
Commission Convention. He mentioned that the challenge of negotiating a new tropical tuna measure 
and emphasised the need for the process to be fair, transparent and ensure no member is left unheard, 
and pledged Korea’s commitment to participate constructively in the negotiations.  
16. Hon. Tetabo Nakara, Minister of Fisheries and Marine Resources Development of Kiribati 
reminded the Commission of the unique geographical configuration of Kiribati marine zones as 
recognized by the Commission in Article 10 (3) (i) of the Convention and the particular challenges it 
encountered.  He observed that Kiribati categorically recognised the high seas pockets as part of their 
planned fishing areas. Kiribati’s non-contiguous EEZ was the country’s only viable source of economic 
survival and stability, and access fees from tuna fishing contributed more than 80% toward the total 
Government’s annual expenditure.  He noted that the small tuna processing plant established on 
Tarawa, which was an important employment provider would struggle to retain its economic viability 
if domestic fishing vessels were further restricted from fishing on FADS for twelve months over and 
above the current three months closure, or if they were deprived of fishing tuna in the adjacent high 
seas.  Tuna was of paramount importance for the viability of Kiribati’s sustainable development for 
current and future generations. In safeguarding this valuable resource, Kiribati had unanimously closed 
off 11% of its combined EEZ area, known as the Phoenix Island Protected Area. Recent research 
indicated that this area has become an important spawning ground sanctuary for tuna and other marine 
resources.  Kiribati reminded developed nations members of the Commission of their obligations under 
several international fisheries conventions including the WCPFC convention to recognise and support 
the special requirements of Small Islands Developing States. 
17. Hon. Semi Koroilavesau, Minister for Fisheries of Fiji emphasised the importance of working 
collaboratively towards achieving consensus on measures that will sustainably managed the highly 
migratory tuna stocks and other species of WCPO. He highlighted the issue of observer safety and 
recalled the intense discussions in the 2016 meeting and the important role observer play in the 
provision of information and data that enable managers understood better the status of resources before 
agreeing to appropriate measures, and a source of employment for many countries in the Pacific. He 
also supported the need to adequately address the issue of disproportionate burden mindful of the 
distinct and diverse economic, social and political situations and capacities of Small Island Developing 
States (SIDS). Fiji stressed the importance of “catch certification” which has become a formidable tool 
10 
to combat IUU fishing and provided an economic opportunity for domestic fleet to access niche markets 
with value added products at a premium rate. There had been ongoing collaborations between relevant 
stakeholders and the government to ensure the certification process is transparent to ensure those that 
were certified are in full compliance with the conditions of their certification. Fiji is supportive of the 
work on the harvest strategy work plan and harvest strategy a key component of the certification 
regime. Minister registered his concern on the slow progress on agreeing on tighter controls on fishing 
efforts in the high seas.   
18. Hon. Lopaoo Natanielu Mu’a, Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries of Samoa acknowledged the 
significance of the tuna and highly migratory fish stocks in WCPO and its contribution to the economic 
development, food security and livelihood of Pacific communities and thus critical to ensure its 
biological and economic sustainability. He noted that Samoa has just hosted the annual Pacific Forum 
Leaders meeting with the theme “the Blue Pacific - our sea of islands, our security through sustainable 
development, management and conservation” which augurs well with the work of the Commission and 
regionalism generally. The Minister referenced the Forum Regional Roadmap for Sustainable Fisheries 
as the key regional strategy guiding collaborative efforts to achieve sustainable fisheries for the Pacific 
and Samoa is committed to make its contribution. Of specific interest to Samoa are the economic 
viability of its domestic longline fleet; biological and economic sustainability of the South Pacific 
albacore stock; its capacity development needs to participate effectively in the fisheries; and ensuring 
effective monitoring, control and surveillance capabilities.    
19. Hon. Patrick Basa, Minister for Fisheries and Marine Resources of Papua New Guinea (PNG), 
urged all Commission Members to respect and uphold the spirit of the Convention in their deliberations. 
He reiterated PNG’s commitment to continue to work with others to maintain the robust decision-
making processes of the Commission to reach consensus decisions supported by all, to sustainably 
manage and conserve the highly migratory fish stocks in the region.  He reminded the Commission of 
the need to respect the development aspirations of small islands developing states and their sovereign 
rights to manage resources in their EEZs including archipelagic waters. He maintained that the 
Commission’s primary responsibility is to adopt management measures for the high seas which are 
compatible with measures in adjacent EEZs. As a PNA member PNG is committed to working with 
other PNA members to enhance the efficiency of the VDS as a management tool. The Minister also 
raised the need to carefully address the issue of disproportionate burden; that conservation and 
management measures must address sustainability and security; and reiterated the Pacific Leaders’ 
direction in favour of zone-based measures.  
20. Hon. Alfred Alfred, Jr., Minister of Natural Resources and Commerce of the Marshall Islands 
(RMI), expressed concern that Commission processes and conservation and management measures 
adopted were often at times burdensome and generated adverse and often costly consequences for 
Small Island Developing States (SIDS). He recalled that the RMI led and actively participated in the 
negotiations leading to the unanimous adoption of CMM 2013-06 and CMM 2013-07 which were 
premised upon Article 30 of the Convention which safeguards the special requirements of SIDS which 
includes but is not limited to development aspirations. The RMI continued to be concerned with several 
proposals tabled by developed CCMs with little to no direct consultations with SIDS on their potential 
adverse impacts on their people and livelihood. The Minister highlighted the critical importance of 
effectively operationalize the Tropical Tuna Bridging Measure. He also mentioned other issues of 
particular interests including stock health, effective control of the high seas around RMI, safety of 
observers and marine pollution.   
21. Niue regarded sustainable management of the ocean as a development priority under its National 
Strategic Development Framework as it provided for food and economic development.  Niue is 
implementing zone-based approaches to managing its EEZ and like other FFA members strongly 
support a zone-based approach to managing the tuna fisheries across the region. Niue looked forward 
to negotiating fair and equitable arrangements for the conservation and allocation of the high seas 
11 
fisheries and strongly support the proposal that the Commission commence a process to establish and 
allocate high seas limits (for both the purse seine and longline fisheries), a process based upon the 
allocation considerations set out in the Convention in Articles 10 (3) and 30, which recognise the 
special circumstances and needs of SIDS. 
22. Indonesia confirmed its commitment to implement the conservation and management measures of 
the Commission as evident by the significant improvement in the level of Indonesia’s compliance in 
recent years. Indonesia has taken actions under its National Plan of Action to Prevent and Combat IUU 
Fishing (2012). Indonesia made efforts to be compatible with CMM 2016-01 on the Conservation and 
Management Measures for bigeye, yellowfin and skipjack tuna in the WCPO. It hoped that the new 
measure will ensure the sustainability of tropical tuna resources and an opportunity to re-develop its 
fisheries after a great reduction of fishing effort through moratorium and ensuring the livelihood of 
small scale fishers and communities reliant on such fisheries. Indonesia has commenced to develop 
Harvest Strategy Framework for Indonesia’s tuna archipelagic waters since 2014 consistent with the 
objectives of the commission for the sustainability of tuna resources.  
23. New Caledonia informed the meeting that despite Vietnam’s statement at TCC14 concerning their 
efforts to address concerns about the operations of the ‘blue boats’ in the Pacific, the blue boats are 
back in the Pacific as evident by two blue boats seized recently in New Caledonia’s waters. This was 
also despite the efforts of FFA and the Quadrilateral Partners (Australia, France, New Zealand and the 
United States) and the European Union in issuing a yellow card for Vietnam. New Caledonia 
acknowledged with appreciation the efforts of Australia in collaboration with the French navy in the 
recent seizures. 
24. American Samoa explained the link between the outcomes of the Commission and its economy that 
depend critically on the economic viability of the large tuna processing plants located in American 
Samoa. The benefits of locating in American Samoa have recently been eroded forcing those processing 
plants to close down and scale down operations resulting in adverse and drastic impacts on its economy 
and loss of employment opportunities for American Samoa and neighbouring Pacific countries. 
American Samoa acknowledged that it carried a demonstrable and quantifiable disproportionate burden 
of the measures of the Commission and intends to seek redress in the new tropical tuna measure 
currently under negotiation. 
25. Philippines reiterated its welcome to delegates to the meeting and to the Philippines. It reconfirmed 
its commitment to the principles of sustainable management and combatting IUU fishing and that their 
domestic laws encapsulate those objectives. Philippines acknowledged that its compliance with CMMs 
of the Commission is a work in progress and they are committed to improve. Philippines noted its 
access to “High Seas Pocket 1” was vital to its economic and social development and wished to preserve 
and improve it under the new tropical tuna measure as a distinct management measure rather than an 
exemption. Philippines tuna fisheries is heavily FAD dependent and any further FAD closure should 
be carefully considered.   
26. Guam supported the statement by the American Samoa delegation in recognition of their economic 
dependence on the region’s tuna fisheries.  Guam noted that historically Guam was a homeport for 
purse seine vessels and for several decades an important longline offloading port. It expressed hope for 
continued cooperation in the conservation and management of the region’s tuna fishery.   
27.  Solomon Islands confirmed its commitment to sustainable fisheries management and to engage 
constructively in the work of the Commission. It identified key issues of interest on the agenda to 
include the tropical tuna measure discussions, harvest strategy work plan, and reforms to the 
compliance monitoring scheme.  
12 
28. The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands also supported the statement of American 
Samoa in recognition of their economic dependence on the region’s tuna fisheries, noting that current 
and future food security considerations associated with tuna resources was also an important issue for 
CNMI. 
29. Vietnam, a cooperating non-member, reiterated its commitment to address the situation of ‘blue 
boat’ as mentioned by New Caledonia and to combat IUU fishing activities. It has recently revised its 
domestic law to impose heavier penalties for Vietnam flagged vessels caught fishing illegally in other 
EEZs. 
1.3 
Meeting arrangements 
30. The Commission considered the meeting arrangements and indicative meeting schedule, including 
planned social functions and proposed side events by ISSF, ABNJ Common Oceans Tuna Project, and 
SPREP. Decisions reached at the Heads of Delegation meeting held the previous day were confirmed.  
1.3.1 
Establishment of small working groups (CNMs, CMS, Others) 
31. The Commission considered the need for small working groups to be established, including the 
corresponding schedule and working arrangements. 
32. The following informal small working groups (SWGs) were established at the start of the meeting 
to further consider these issues and to provide a report for consideration by plenary:  
• Finalisation of the provisional Compliance Monitoring Report (pCMR) (led by TCC Chair); 
• Consideration of participatory rights for Cooperating Non-Members (led by Canada); and 
• Draft Bridging Measure on Tropical Tuna (led by the Chair).   
 
33. The Chair explained the draft Indicative Schedule (WCPFC14-2017-02_rev1) noting that based 
on the proposals submitted for consideration at this meeting additional working groups may be needed.  
It was agreed that consideration would be given to the establishment of additional working groups as 
the meeting progressed and where deemed necessary.   
34. The following additional informal SWGs were subsequently established during the course of the 
meeting:  
• South Pacific albacore proposals for a draft measure and a target reference point (led by New 
Zealand); 
• Prevention of Marine Pollution proposal (led by Republic of Marshall Islands); 
• Port State measures proposal (led by New Zealand); 
• Development of Terms of Reference for a Comprehensive Sharks and Ray Measure (led by 
Japan); and 
• Seabirds (led by New Zealand). 
 
In addition, a number of other proposals and draft text were progressed through the proponents leading 
informal discussions and holding consultations with interested CCMs in the margins of the meeting.   
 
13 
1.3.2 
Election of FAC co-chair 
35. The Commission extended its thanks to former FAC co-chair, Dr Paul Callaghan (USA) for his 
services.  It was noted that FAC would continue to meet in the margins of WCPFC14, and that a second 
co-chair was needed.  
36. The Commission appointed Mr Wataru Tanoue (Japan) to be FAC co-chair.  
37. Mr Tanoue’s duties began immediately, to assist FAC11 to progress its work throughout the course 
of the meeting. 
AGENDA ITEM 2 – REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR  
38. The Executive Director, as required by rule 13 of the Rules of Procedures of the Commission, 
presented his Annual Report (WCPFC14-2017-04), highlighting the main work programmes and 
activities of the Commission and its Secretariat for 2017. He noted that 2017 was a busy year with three 
intersessional sessions of the Commission convened to progress the negotiations of CMMs for tropical 
tuna and South Pacific albacore. The Executive Director acknowledged with appreciation the monetary 
contribution by ABNJ (Common Oceans) Tuna Project and the USA for providing the meeting venue 
for one of the intersessional meetings to progress the draft bridging measure on tropical tuna and to 
New Zealand for the monetary contribution for intersessional meeting to progress the draft bridging 
measure for the south Pacific albacore. The said meetings were in addition to the annual meetings of 
the SC13, NC13, and TCC13 which were all held successfully and their summary reports published. 
The Executive Director thanked the officials that presided over the work of those subsidiary body 
meeting, namely; Ms Berry Muller (RMI) and Mr Aisake Batibasaga (Fiji) as Chair and Vice-Chair 
respectively for SC13, Mr Masanori Miyahara (Japan) and Mr Mike Tosatto (USA) as Chair and Vice-
Chair of NC13, Ms Alexa Cole (USA) and Mr Monte Depaune (Nauru) as Chair and Vice-Chair for 
TCC13, and Dr Paul Callaghan (USA) and Mr Magele Etuati Ropeti as Co-Chairs for FAC10. The 
Executive Director reported that the financial affairs of the Commission for the financial 2016 were in 
order with the Audit Report of the 2016 accounts and financial statements were audited to be in 
compliance with the Commission financial regulations. The Executive Director registered the gratitude 
of the Commission to all the members and partner agencies who provided voluntary contributions to 
support the work programme of the Commission. The Commission continued to benefit in 2017 from 
the quality services of its services providers namely SPC-OFP as the science and data services provider, 
ISC as science services provider for the NC, and FFA as the VMS services provider. The Commission 
Chair signed two memoranda of cooperation with the Commission for the Conservation of Southern 
Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT) on cross-endorsement of ROP observers and exchange and release of data. The 
Executive Director continued his collaborations with other organisations through attendance at 
meetings of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC), Parties to the Nauru Agreement, 
Forum Fisheries Agency, Pacific Islands Forum, and FAO through the ABNJ project. It was noted that 
the Commission was successfully managing two major projects – the bycatch component of the ABNJ 
Common Oceans project, and the West Pacific East Asia (WPEA) Project. The Executive Director 
advised that the technical coordinator for the ABNJ bycatch component Dr Shelley Clarke will be 
relocated away from Pohnpei in 2018 but was assured that Dr Clarke would continue to provide the 
services to WCPFC that she had in the past from her new location. 
39. The European Union thanked the Executive Director for the extensive report which demonstrated 
the wealth of activities of the organisation which continue to grow. European Union welcomed and 
encouraged cooperation with other RFMO especially IATTC and it regretted that the WCPFC didn’t 
participate at the work of the joint tuna RFMO Working Group on FAD. European Union thanked Dr 
Shelley Clarke for the quality services rendered and wished to be assured that the shark project funded 
14 
by the European Union will not be jeopardised by her relocation which the Executive Director 
confirmed.   
40. The Republic of Korea thanked the Executive Director for the report and acknowledged progress 
achieved in the age and growth project and thanked SPC-OFP for their services. Korea thanked the 
Secretariat for coordinating efforts to progress negotiations of the bridging measure for tropical tuna 
and for the documentation for the meeting. 
41. Cook Islands on behalf of FFA thanked the Executive Director for the Report. FFA maintained the 
importance of the Secretariat developing a Corporate Plan that aligns the budget and the work plans 
and priorities of the Commission. The Commission should make concerted efforts to prioritise its work 
so it can streamline and rationalise its number of meetings. The need for intersessional sessions should 
not be used as a precedent for moving away from the original requirement of discussing all the 
substantive business of the Commission within two sessions mindful of the limitations of SIDS. FFA 
encouraged the use of virtual working groups and supported ongoing collaborations between WCPFC 
and IATTC to ensure that WCPFC has complete involvement in the process of rebuilding the Pacific 
bluefin stock, and in the monitoring and management of the IATTC/WCPFC high seas overlap area. 
42. Indonesia thanked the Secretariat for its continued support to the WPEA project and hoped that the 
New Zealand funded activities of the WPEA will get off to a good start. Indonesia also queried the 
vacancies in support staff positions.  
43. The Executive Director, responding to Indonesia’s query, explained that both vacancies are part of 
the compliance team and arose out of staff resignations. The terms of reference for those positions were 
being reviewed as part of efforts to reform them before they are filled. 
44. The Commission accepted the 2017 Annual Report of the Executive Director (WCPFC14-
2017-04).  
AGENDA ITEM 3 – MEMBERSHIP AND OTHER APPLICATIONS 
3.1 
Status of the Convention  
45. New Zealand, as depositary of the Convention on the Conservation and Management of Highly 
Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, presented WCPFC14-2017-05 Status 
of the Convention. It advised that since its last report in December 2016, New Zealand had not received 
notification of any instruments of ratification or accession to the Convention.   
46. The Commission noted the report on Status of the Convention (WCPFC14-2017-05) 
3.2 
Update on observer status  
47. The Executive Director referred the meeting to WCPFC14-2017-06 List of Observers that provided 
the full list of observer delegations.  It was confirmed that that since WCPFC13 two new observers had 
been invited intersessionally to participate in this session of the Commission namely Australian 
National Centre for Ocean Resources and Security (ANCORS) and Ocean Outcomes (O2).  
48. The Commission noted the updated list of observers to the Commission (WCPFC14-2017-
06) 
15 
3.3 
Applications for Cooperating Non-Member status  
49. The Commission considered applications for Cooperating Non-Member (CNM) status for 2018 in 
accordance with CMM 2009-11, including recommendations from the 13th Technical and Compliance 
Committee (TCC13). As outlined in paper WCPFC14-2017-07 Cooperating Non-Member requests, 
there were seven applications for CNM status in 2018 from Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Mexico, 
Panama, Thailand and Vietnam.  
50. Samoa, on behalf of FFA Members, noted that the renewal of CNM status was conditional upon 
full compliance with the national laws and regulations of any licensing CCM, and all conservation and 
management measures and provisions of the WCPF Convention. FFA Members requested information 
on what steps CNMs have taken towards addressing any compliance issues noted in this year’s 
provisional Compliance Monitoring Report.   
51. FSM, on behalf of FFA Members, noted Vietnam’s increased acknowledgement and international 
engagement on addressing illegal fishing by small-scale fishing vessels originating from their 
jurisdiction. The issue of blue boat incursions posed a serious and ongoing threat to many coastal 
CCM’s fisheries, livelihoods and sovereignty. FFA Members noted the Vietnamese Prime Minister’s 
official directive issued in May this year dealing with this issue. In light of the recent comments made 
by New Caledonia regarding incursions in their zone, FFA Members requested an update from Vietnam 
on the status of implementation of the range of domestic actions outlined in the official directive. 
Information was sought on the efforts that had been taken by Vietnam to: i) develop national policies 
to address IUU fishing; ii) Enhance monitoring and control and surveillance of domestic fishing 
vessels; and iii). Enhance interagency cooperation in the conduct of MCS activities. 
52. The Chair noted the normal process was that the Commission accept the applications then the SWG 
considers the associated participatory rights of those CNMs for the next year.  Based on the comments 
expressed, there were some outstanding issues that would need to be resolved before the Commission 
could take a decision on accepting the seven CNM applications.   
53. Some CCMs indicated a preference to resume discussions after the informal SWG on the 
provisional Compliance Monitoring Report has the chance to complete its work, particularly to review 
any relevant new information submitted by CNM applicants. Accordingly, further discussion of 
applications was deferred.   
54. After further consideration of compliance information submitted by the applying CNMs, the 
Commission agreed to accept the applications for renewal of CNM status in 2018 of Ecuador, El 
Salvador, Liberia, Panama and Thailand. Members deferred consideration of requests from Vietnam 
and Mexico until additional information could be provided by those applicants. 
55. In respect of Vietnam’s request, some CCMs reiterated their concerns about the “blue boats” issue 
and requested a response from Vietnam.  Vietnam’s outstanding financial contribution for 2017 was 
also highlighted to be problematic.  In respect of Mexico’s request, it was recognised that Mexico had 
not sent delegates to WCPFC14 and questions remained about its commitment to accept high seas 
boarding and inspection in the Convention Area.   
56. In the margins of the meeting Vietnam completed payment of its final contribution for 2017 and 
the Secretariat was able to confirm receipt of the contributions. Vietnam also gave assurances to the 
Commission about its 2018 contribution.  
57. In the course of the WCPFC14 meeting Mexico submitted two letters to the Secretariat in response 
to the Commission’s questions (WCPFC14-2017-OP016 and WCPFC14-2017-OP016_suppl).   
16 
58.  The report of the informal SWG considering the CNM participatory rights made the following 
recommendations: 
• The SWG noted with appreciation the attendance and participation of Ecuador, El Salvador, 
Liberia, Panama, Thailand, and Vietnam in the Group’s discussions. Mexico was not able to 
attend but did write during the meeting to confirm their interest and commitment of payment 
for 2017.  
• Some of the attending CCMs stated their acceptance of CNM applications was conditional 
on the receipt of financial contributions.  Other CCMs noted their interpretation that voluntary 
contributions were expected, and that they suggested that decisions on CNM applications take 
into account a range of factors based on the relevant CMM.  
• CCMs noted the importance that CNMs meet reporting requirements and deadlines, and that 
a lack of full and timely reporting in future years could affect decisions on CNM applications 
or membership. 
• It was confirmed that applications were complete and outstanding data addressed for the 
seven applicants. 
• Participants noted that they felt that the discussion and decision on Vietnam’s request for 
CNM status be considered in plenary.  Some CCMs noted concern over the activity of “blue 
boats” in the Convention Area. Vietnam noted the measures they have taken to update their 
legislation including penalties and committed to there being no further instances in 2018 or 
they would not seek CNM status for 2019. Some CCMs noted their appreciation of the actions 
that Vietnam has taken and indicated they were actively working with Vietnam to address the 
situation. 
• Participants noted that they felt that the discussion and decision on Mexico’s request for 
CNM status be considered in plenary.  Some CCMs noted concern over the lack of 
commitment to apply the WCPFC HSBI scheme.  Others noted the interest in having 
Mexico’s ongoing engagement as they fish shared stocks in IATTC, have not had a fishing 
vessel active in the Convention Area, and that they understand that there are domestic 
constraints on applying measures where there is no treaty obligation.   
• The SWG agreed to recommend that the CNMs accepted by the WCPFC plenary (i.e. 
Ecuador, El Salvador, Liberia, Mexico, Panama, Thailand and Vietnam) have the same 
participatory rights in 2018 as they had in 2017. 
 
59. WCPFC14 approved the applications for CNM status for 2018 from Ecuador, El 
Salvador, Liberia, Mexico, Panama, Thailand and Vietnam.   
3.3.1 
Participatory rights of CNMs  
60. WCPFC14 agreed to the following limits to be applied to the participatory rights of CNMs 
(Convention / CMM 2009-11): 
a. In accordance with the WCPF Convention and its conservation and management measures 
and resolutions, the following participatory rights apply to Cooperating Non- Members 
(CNMs) for fisheries in the high seas within the WCPFC Convention Area; 
b. In addition, unless otherwise specified below, CNMs may fish in waters under their national 
jurisdiction or other CCMs’ national jurisdiction, in accordance with appropriate bilateral 
arrangements; 
17 
c. CNMs shall ensure vessels flying their flags comply with all provisions of the WCPFC 
Convention and the WCPFC conservation and management measures. In addition, CNM 
vessels will be placed on the WCPFC Record of Fishing Vessels (WCPFC RFV); 
d. CCMs shall ensure that CNM fishing activities that are conducted in waters under their 
national jurisdiction in accordance with bilateral arrangements are consistent with all relevant 
conservation and management measures and provisions of the WCPF Convention; and 
e. Renewal of CNM status by the Commission will take into account compliance with the 
national laws and regulations of any licensing CCM, and all conservation and management 
measures and provisions of the WCPFC Convention. CCMs shall identify any violations by 
vessels flagged to a CNM and report on any investigations of such violations to the Secretariat 
for attention by TCC. 
Participatory rights of each CNM in 2018 
61. Ecuador: The participatory rights of Ecuador for fishing in the WCPO are limited to purse 
seine fishing, with no participatory rights for fishing on the high seas for highly migratory fish 
stocks in the Convention Area. Any introduction of purse seine fishing capacity is to be in 
accordance with paragraph 12 of CMM 2009-11 and CMM 2016-01 or its replacement 
measure. 
62. El Salvador: The participatory rights of El Salvador for fishing in the WCPO are limited 
to purse seine fishing only. The total level of effort by purse seine vessels of El Salvador on 
the high seas shall not exceed 29 days in the Convention Area. Any introduction of purse seine 
fishing capacity is to be in accordance with paragraph 12 of CMM 2009-11 and CMM 2016-
01 or its replacement measure. 
63. Liberia: The participatory rights of Liberia are limited to reefer vessels to engage in 
transhipment activities, and bunker and supply vessels to support fishing vessels in the 
Convention area. 
64. Mexico: It was noted that Mexico had participated in the work of the Northern Committee 
(NC) at NC 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 and, noting the need for cooperation with the work of the 
NC particularly in regard to Pacific bluefin tuna, encouraged Mexico to continue to participate 
in the NC. Mexico does not intend to have a vessel presence in 2018. Any future introduction 
of purse seine fishing capacity is to be in accordance with paragraph 12 of CMM 2009-11 and 
CMM 2016-01 or its replacement measure. Their letter notes their commitment to comply with 
the legal provisions and obligations as a CNM. 
65. Panama: The participatory rights of Panama in the WCPO are limited to the provision of 
carrier and bunker vessels. Panama’s participatory rights also apply to vessels that supply food, 
water and spare parts to carrier vessels that engage in transhipment activities, provided that 
these vessels do not engage in activities supporting fishing vessels, including providing and/or 
servicing FADs. The SWG also noted that this does not result in any additional participatory 
rights in 2018 to the participatory rights granted to Panama in 2017. 
66. Thailand: The participatory rights of Thailand in the WCPO are limited to the provision 
of carrier and bunker vessels only. 
18 
67. Vietnam: The participatory rights of Vietnam in the WCPO are limited to the provision of 
carrier and bunker vessels only.  
WCPFC/IATTC Overlap Area 
68. In accordance with the decision of WCPFC9 regarding the management of the overlap area 
of 4˚S and between 130˚W and 150˚W, vessels flagged to Ecuador, El Salvador and Mexico 
will be governed by the IATTC when fishing in the overlap area. 
69. In accordance with the Data Exchange MOU agreed by both Commissions, fishing vessels 
flying the flag of a member of either the IATTC or WCPFC shall cooperate with the RFMO 
to which they are not a member by voluntarily providing operational catch and effort data for 
its fishing activities for highly migratory species in the overlap area. 
70. For the purpose of investigation of possible IUU fishing activities and consistent with 
international and domestic laws, vessels flying the flag of a CNM that is a Contracting Party 
to the IATTC will cooperate with those coastal State members of the WCPFC whose EEZs 
occur in the overlap area by voluntarily providing VMS reports (date, time and position) to 
those coastal States when operating in the overlap area. 
Implementation of changes to the CNM request template 
71. As agreed at WCPFC13 a column was included in the CNM application template where a 
CNM applicant could indicate their interest in becoming a member of the Commission. 
3.4 
Membership Process in WCPFC  
72. The United States introduced a Discussion paper on Membership Process in WCPFC (WCPFC14-
2017-DP18), which aimed to build on previous years discussions on whether the WCPFC membership 
should be allowed to grow and what criteria or processes could be used when considering new 
members. The United States was of the view that WCPFC should extend to other countries the courtesy 
of considering their interest in joining the organisation, as they assessed WCPFC as standing apart from 
other Regional Fisheries Management Organisation (RFMOs) as it appeared to be less open to new 
members and did not have a clear process for inviting new members to join the organisation. The paper 
was also noted to include some membership precedents from other RFMOs. 
73. Palau, on behalf of FFA Members, acknowledged the requests for membership and thanked the 
CNMs for their interest and thanked the USA for their paper. FFA Members reiterated statements made 
at previous meetings, in particular that this Commission was unique compared to other RFMOs. The 
majority of members were small island developing States (SIDS) that were overwhelmingly dependent 
on fisheries resources and the majority of fishing takes place within their waters. FFA Members 
expressed that they did not think it appropriate to expect that what happened in other RFMOs would 
automatically apply in this region. Reiterating their view from the WCPFC13 meeting, they expressed 
that the Commission was not a “level playing field” for all Members, particularly for SIDS and this 
was a real concern for them in relation to considering potential new Members. FFA members also 
confirmed their view that the process in the Convention is sufficiently clear on the subject of new 
Members – by consensus and by invitation. FFA Members also expressed their firmly held view that 
CMM 2009-11 both considers the uniqueness of this RFMO and provides a mechanism for cooperation 
with non-parties. FFA Members encouraged CNMs to continue to cooperate with the Commission 
through the CNM request mechanism. 
19 
74. Nauru stated that PNA members did not support the expansion of the Commission to include new 
members. PNA members have always considered WCPFC to be a closed Commission and that new 
members could only join by invitation and consensus as enshrined in the Convention. That process 
reflects the nature of this Commission where over 85% of the catch was made in the waters of 
developing countries, especially SIDS, who are highly dependent on those resources.  
75. The European Union thanked the United States for their paper, as a balanced and representative 
overview of other RFMO membership processes. The European Union did not see how this RFMO 
was different in international law and that it should not be a closed organisation. The focus should be 
on determining the conditions of new membership in keeping with the Law of the Sea, the basis of the 
existence of this very organisation. It hoped this discussion could continue.  
76. Chinese Taipei supported an RFMO process that was open to new membership applications. 
WCPFC did not need to be a closed RFMO in order to achieve its objectives. A number of the interested 
applicants were already members of other tuna RFMOs, and the Commission should at least consider 
their applications or at least consider developing process to consider applications for new members.  
77. Papua New Guinea in support of Nauru’s intervention, reiterated that PNA members do not support 
the expansion of the Commission to include new Members. The current CNM process provides 
appropriate opportunities to CNMs for participation in WCPO fisheries and in the Commission 
processes. 
78. Japan thanked the United States for their paper and agreed that this tuna RFMO was unique, 
however Members should at least start a discussion about new membership. Denying that discussion is 
inconsistent with Article 4 of the Convention, the Convention on the Law of the Sea and the UN Fish 
Stocks Agreement.  
79. The Republic of Korea supported the Commission giving consideration to establishing the 
processes, as is proposed in the paper by the United States.  
80. Palau further noted that 85% of the catch managed by this Commission are harvested in waters of 
developing countries.  This Commission was unique compared to other RFMOs, and this is also 
relevant to the consideration of new Members.   
81. The Republic of the Marshall Islands acknowledged Article 4 of the Convention as being important 
to this discussion, however it expressed that due consideration should also be given to the requirement 
in the Convention for an invitation by consensus to be extended to new members. The Commission 
should also be mindful of Article 30, the special requirements of Small Island Developing States, CMM 
2013-06 and the uniqueness of this Commission particularly given that the majority of catches are made 
within developing countries EEZs.  In this respect, the Commission needs to recognise that some of the 
current members have compliance issues.  The interests of SIDS need to be addressed before 
considering the issue of potential new members.   
82. Samoa noted that there was not one solution to fit all RFMOs. The core responsibility of this 
Commission was the monitoring and compliance of WCPO fisheries resources. Rules had already been 
set in the Convention for the admission of new members. The doors to this Commission are not closed, 
the doors are open by invitation and consensus. The interests of SIDS are important to this issue, and 
indicated a preference of not changing the current arrangements.   
83. Tonga thanked the United States for its proposal and was respectful of those interested in WCPFC 
membership. It sought clarification on the intent and real interests behind the submission of this paper 
and of those fishing nations who had expressed an interest in becoming new members.   
20 
84. Canada expressed appreciation to the United States for its paper.  Canada supported an on-going 
membership discussion in the WCPFC. It acknowledged the UN Fish Stocks Agreement but also 
recognised the uniqueness of the WCPFC that clearly differentiated it from other RFMOs, in particular 
SIDS needs. It expressed that perhaps there was a gap in the paper duly considering the decision-
making process of this forum in Article 20.  The views expressed by a number of small islands 
developing States need to be acknowledged and duly considered in future discussions on this matter.   
85. Ecuador thanked the United States delegation for the presentation of this discussion paper.  Ecuador 
had been a WCPFC CNM for a number of years and had not received an answer to its request for full 
membership which made it feel discriminated against. WCPFC was the first RFMO established under 
the UN Fish Stocks Agreement. It understood that this organisation was unique, but expressed that not 
even wanting to talk about new membership contravened international law. Ecuador asked and 
encouraged WCPFC to develop a framework to welcome new members. If it could not be considered 
now it should be at least considered for the future.   
86. Panama thanked the United States for their paper. The question of which countries should be 
eligible warranted discussion. It repeated its interest in becoming a full member and asked that rules 
for invitation be developed by the WCPFC. Those interested in full membership were also developing 
countries with a similar understanding of SIDS needs.   
87. The Chair thanked the United States for bringing the paper to the Commission and acknowledged 
that the paper had encouraged discussion on this matter. Based on the discussions, it is clear there 
currently is no consensus to consider developing a process for new membership beyond the existing 
CNM request process, and the membership invitation provisions in the Convention. The range of views 
expressed by Members during discussions was duly noted.  
AGENDA ITEM 4 – NEW PROPOSALS 
88. CCMs with new proposals were invited to present them to the Commission. Proposals that 
addressed matters relevant to other agenda items were presented under those agenda items. In 
considering new proposals, the Commission was invited to consider how to progress discussions 
throughout the meeting and whether additional informal small working groups were required. 
4.1 
Implementation of CMM 2013-06  
89. The Republic of the Marshall Islands, on behalf of FFA Members, introduced WCPFC14-2017-
DP11 Implementation of CMM 2013-06.  The paper presented FFA member views that reflected on the 
past three years since the adoption of CMM 2013-06 in Cairns, and surmised that the measure is yet to 
be fully implemented.  The intent of CMM 2013-06 was to assist the Commission in giving full 
recognition to the special requirements of Small Island Developing States and Territory CCMs as 
outlined in Article 30 of the Convention.  CMM 2013-06 sought to provide a mechanism to 
operationalise the implementation of Article 30, through providing a list of basic criteria against which 
all CMMs should be assessed to ensure that those special requirements are taken into account by the 
Commission and that disproportionate burden is duly addressed.  Over the period most non-FFA CCMs 
did make some attempt to address the requirements of CMM 2013-06 by providing responses to the 
CMM 2013-06 appraisal criteria when tabling proposals, but there remain a few instances where CMM 
proposals had been tabled without the appraisal criteria having been completed.  The few instances 
when CCMs have travelled to consult directly with FFA Members during their process of developing 
responses to CMM 2013-06 criteria were recognised.  All CCMs were urged to actively consult with 
FFA members in the developing of responses to the criteria in CMM 2013-06, so to ensure smoother 
passage of future proposals across the floor of the Commission.  FFA Members reiterated that they will 
seriously consider rejecting any proposal that does not make an honest attempt to address CMM 2013-
21 
06 requirements.  The Marshall Islands urged that the consultation process with SIDS on the CMM 
2013-06 checklist was an extremely important part of the development and consideration of new 
proposals in the Commission, and in particular in addressing disproportionate burden.   
90. Japan expressed regret if some CCMs felt that all CMM 2013-06 criteria had not been adequately 
addressed in any of its proposals to the Commission to date. However, it made the point that it was 
necessary to recognise that the degree of application of CMM 2013-06 does vary depending on the 
content of a proposal. Secondly, Japan had made efforts to have prior consultation with FFA Members, 
including on the tropical tuna measure. However, such consultation might not always be possible, and 
suggested that perhaps the agreement by the Commission to submit a proposal one month before the 
annual meeting nonetheless provided opportunity for the CMM 2013-06 checklist to be adequately 
considered and for the necessary consultations to take place, where needed.   
91. Republic of Korea stated that their interpretation was that CMM 2013-06 does not require the 
proponent of a new proposal to have prior consultation with SIDS members in advance of submitting 
its proposal to the annual session. It was not appropriate for the lack of consultation prior to the meeting 
to mean any new proposals at this meeting could not be considered. In referring to CMM 2013-06, 
Korea noted that it was the Commission who is required to consider the eight questions to evaluate the 
nature and extent of impact of a proposal on SIDS and Territories. So, it is the Commission that should 
undertake the assessment and can consider proponents’ submissions against the criteria in CMM 2013-
06.  It was also noted that CMM 2013-06 paragraph 4 refers to a process that where transfer of 
disproportionate burden has occurred, the Commission must undertake an analysis to consider who is 
impacted and ways to mitigate that burden. To date such an analysis has not been presented to the 
Commission.   
92. China noted that according to the Convention this Commission should take into consideration the 
special requirements of developing States. While recognising that special consideration should be given 
to those States when the Commission adopts CMMs, China had some concerns about the ideas 
expressed in the paper. All Members of the Commission have equal obligations and equal rights, so 
even though it was important to be aware of the requirement, the implementation of this measure 
equally applies the requirements of all CMMs. This was the best way for common objectives and 
common goals to be met.  
93. The United States thanked FFA Members for the paper and recognised the importance to those 
CCMs of improved implementation of CMM 2013-06. The United States indicated that they would 
further consider this matter over the next year and undertook to make efforts to improve consultation 
with FFA on any relevant proposals in 2018.  The United States confirmed it shared the interpretation 
that CMM 2013-06 does not specifically call for consultation. However, if there was to be a requirement 
for consultation in the context of CMM 2013-06, it asks that such consultation extends to the United 
States and its participating territories in respect of relevant proposals.   
94. Chinese Taipei confirmed that it also shared the interpretation that CMM 2013-06 does not require 
prior consultation.  The process set out in paragraph 4 of CMM 2013-06 provides the opportunity for 
a CCM to express their views at the Commission annual session, if they thought the proposal would 
impose a disproportionate burden on that CCM or group of CCMs. The proponent of the proposal in 
hearing those views may then choose to modify their proposal to take on board those views.  The 
suggestion to have a requirement to have a prior consultation with SIDS was not supported.   
95. The European Union thanked the FFA Members for the paper and confirmed that the checklist and 
the requirements of CMM 2013-06 were recognised as important matters. Consultation with all relevant 
Members was something that all CCMs should strive to do, but sometimes it was not easy to achieve, 
prior to the meeting, though consultation was possible during the annual meeting.  It indicated that 
sometimes disproportionate burden can be addressed elsewhere for example through development 
22 
assistance programmes, and does not necessarily need to be in-built within each measure.  It was 
concerned that the effect of the paper may be to limit the ability of non-SIDS members to table 
proposals.  The European Union undertook to strive to comply with all requirements in CMM 2013-06 
and they confirmed that the requirements are not taken lightly. 
96. The Republic of Marshall Islands reiterated that the development of the proposal that subsequently 
became CMM 2013-06 was intended to provide a mechanism to assist the Commission with 
implementing Article 30.  If a proponent intends for a proposal to be adopted by the Commission, 
consultation with all relevant CCMs would be a prerequisite to achieving consensus.  It follows that if 
SIDS are expected to implement or be impacted by a proposal then they must be consulted, both to 
assist them with understanding the proposal and to provide them time to consider any disproportionate 
burden or implementation constraints that could arise from the proposals requirements.  CCMs were 
urged to implement CMM 2013-06 though undertaking consultations with FFA members in advance 
of tabling of all new proposals.  Japan’s efforts to undertake mutual consultations with FFA members 
over a number of years were acknowledged to have worked well.   
97. The Federated States of Micronesia noted that perhaps there have been CMMs that were adopted 
in the Commission without all CCMs fully understanding the impact of what the measures could have 
on SIDS. The checklist of questions in CMM 2013-06 was intended to streamline the work of the 
Commission in implementing Article 30, and sought to provide some checks that avoided SIDS getting 
into a non-compliant situation because they did not fully understand new programmes or processes and 
the implementation burden that they simply did not have the capacity to implement. Currently there is 
an intersessional process that is underway to look at ways to ensure sustainable funding for the Special 
Requirements Fund, and in addition to this SIDS are also having to search for alternative resourcing to 
help them to get out of non-compliant situations. Ideally, the full implementation of CMM 2013-06 
and Article 30 would mean that the obligation to provide funding and resourcing to SIDS and 
participating territories were able to be resolved at the time a measure is adopted, rather than being 
aspects that have to be requested during the negotiations or afterwards.    
98. French Polynesia requested that consultation with SIDS in relation to CMM 2013-06 criteria should 
also extend to the French territories in the Pacific.  
99. The Chair acknowledged that it was beneficial to have this discussion prior to commencing the 
consideration of new proposals and review of existing measures.  In summarising, the Chair noted that 
all CCMs who spoke expressed their support for CMM 2013-06 and a willingness to ensure that CMM 
2013-06 is implemented properly.  There remain, however, some questions about how implementation 
can be improved and made more effective and these need further attention by the Commission.  CCMs 
were encouraged to continue considering these matters throughout the meeting in the consideration of 
new proposals.   
4.2 
Port Based measures / minimum standards  
100. 
The European Union introduced WCPFC14-2017-DP02 Proposal for a Conservation and 
Management Measure on WCPFC Scheme for Minimum Standards for Inspection in Port, confirming 
that the proposal is not being tabled for the first time.  The European Union noted that this year was 
more timely for this region to establish a regime for Port Inspections in light of recent ratifications of 
the FAO Port State Measures Agreement. The proposal was noted to be a “lighter” version of the Port 
State Measures international requirements, with minimum standards and a low level of fisheries 
inspections in port being prescribed. The main objective of the proposal was to combat and eradicate 
IUU fishing. It would subsequently have a positive direct and indirect contribution to development 
opportunities for SIDS. The proposal would mainly impact Port States within the Convention Area but 
the level of impact would depend on the number of inspections to be undertaken by the individual Port 
States. The mechanism proposed was intended to help SIDS with the necessary capacity to conduct a 
23 
5% level of inspection in port, which was considered significant to fight IUU fishing. The CMM 2013-
06 checklist has been completed and is contained therein.  The European Union also drew attention to 
their report on implementation of Article 30, WCPFC14-2017-DP23 noting that within that paper there 
are a number of forms of assistance outlined that are seeking to directly provide assistance to SIDS in 
the areas of support to port inspections.   
101. 
The Federated States of Micronesia, on behalf of FFA Members and Japan, introduced a joint 
proposal contained in WCPFC14-2017-DP12_Rev1 Proposal on Conservation and Management 
Measure for Port State Measures.  The proposal reflected joint efforts to commence the development 
of port state measures in the WCPF Convention Area. The purpose of this measure was to establish 
processes and procedures for CCMs to request that port inspections be undertaken on fishing vessels 
suspected of engaging in IUU fishing or fishing related activities in support of IUU fishing. It also 
provided guidelines for the training of inspectors. Addressing IUU fishing was of significant 
importance to FFA Members to ensure that their fishery resources could be managed sustainably, and 
that the necessary monitoring and compliance scheme (MCS) infrastructure was built to enable 
adequate responses to IUU fishing, and improve vessel compliance. Port State Measures were only one 
tool in a whole suite of MCS activities required to address IUU fishing, and must be incorporated into 
a broader and integrated MCS framework. It was explained that the proposal duly considered 
international requirements and differing capabilities within the ports of the region.  Importantly it 
sought to build on a number of regional initiatives developed by the FFA including Harmonised 
Minimum Terms and Conditions for fishing access, and the Niue Treaty Subsidiary arrangements that 
among others facilitated sharing of MCS information and data and resources.   
102. 
Japan thanked the European Union for their proposal in DP02, and thanked the FSM for 
presenting the joint proposal (DP12_rev1). Japan explained that having ratified the Port State Measures 
Agreement in May 2017, it was now able to fully implement Port State Measures.  However, it also 
recognised that it was not possible for all CCMs to achieve the same level of implementation at this 
point in time.  The proposal in DP12_rev1 sought to commence with a starting basis for Port Inspections 
that all CCMs were able to implement, noting that this may not be sufficient.  Attention was drawn to 
the two years review clause in the joint proposal, and it expressed a hope that after two years all CCMs 
might be in a position to implement a strengthened CMM that is more closely aligned to the FAO Port 
State Measures Agreement.   
103. 
The United States noted it had long supported the adoption of a port state measure in WCPFC.  
It confirmed that it had provided some comments to FFA on their proposal, and was also interested in 
incorporating some elements from the European Union proposal into the FFA proposal.   
104. 
A number of CCMs confirmed their interest and support towards combining elements of the 
two proposals, with a view to having a single proposal that could be considered for adoption at 
WCPFC14.  WCPFC14 agreed to establish a SWG at this meeting (led by New Zealand) to consider 
the two proposals further.  
105. 
New Zealand provided brief updates to plenary on the SWG’s work throughout the course of 
the meeting. Several amendments were made to the joint FFA-Japan proposal and the final proposal 
for consideration is contained in WCPFC14-2017-DP12_Rev4 FFA and Japan Proposal on Port State 
Measures WG. New Zealand thanked Japan for their substantive work on this issue over the course of 
the WCPFC14. 
106. 
The Chair thanked New Zealand for its leadership in the SWG and for bringing a proposal 
forward for the Commission’s adoption.  
107. 
The Commission agreed to adopt CMM 2017-02 Conservation and Management 
Measure on minimum standards for Port State Measures (Attachment E).  
24 
4.3 
Protection of Observers  
108. 
Japan introduced WCPFC14-2017-DP03 Proposal to amend Conservation and Management 
Measure for the Protection of WCPFC Regional Observer Programme (ROP) observers (CMM 2016-
03), which proposes the deletion of footnote 1 in CMM 2016-03 that provided additional time for Japan 
to implement the provisions of the CMM. Japan confirmed that following the last annual session, Japan 
had the time to review the requirements and to take the necessary domestic measures to fully implement 
all the provisions of CMM 2016-03.   
109. 
The Republic of Marshall Islands expressed appreciation to Japan for taking the necessary 
steps to be in a position to remove the footnote from CMM 2016-03.  It emphasised that it is incumbent 
on all CCMs and the Commission to ensure the full implementation of this measure and supported the 
improved safety of ROP observers in the region.   
110. 
The Chair noted the Commission’s appreciation of Japan’s efforts over the last year and CCMs 
supported the proposal to remove the footnote from CMM 2016-03.  
111. 
The Commission agreed to adopt CMM 2017-03 Conservation Management Measure 
for the Protection of WCPFC Regional Observer Programme Observers (Attachment F), 
which will replace CMM 2016-03.  
4.4 
Observer Conduct  
112. 
The Republic of Korea introduced its joint proposal with Japan contained in WCPFC14-2017-
DP19 Proposed Conservation and Management Measure on the Standards of Conduct for ROP 
observers. They proposed that major components of the Code of Conduct for Observers, presented by 
the Intersessional Working Group on Regional Observer Program (IWG-ROP) meeting which reported 
to the Commission in March 2008, be taken out and placed into a measure to ensure that Regional 
Observer Programme (ROP) Observers discharge their duties to ROP requirements and not engage in 
any activity likely to bring the ROP into disrepute.  Korea argued that such a decision would contribute 
to the attainment of the objectives of the ROP and the safety of those on board the vessel on which 
ROP Observers are deployed. The proposal built on paragraph 2 of Attachment K, Annex A of CMM 
2007-01 (CMM on ROP), which broadly outlined the responsibilities of observers. The proposal also 
envisaged a scheme that allows the master of vessels to check and report the conduct of Observers on 
board their vessels. Crew and masters would be held to the same standards as observers. This proposal 
was developed in response to a growing number of incidents that involve ROP Observers’ misconduct 
that often threaten the safety of the crew on board and interfered with the proper functioning of the 
vessel conducting lawful fishing operations.  
113. 
Japan thanked Korea for explaining the joint proposal. Both CCMs viewed the regional 
observer programme to be important but they had been experiencing several incidents of observer’s 
misbehaving and the frequency of misbehaviour was increasing. Although Japan did not insist on the 
adoption of a code of conduct for ROP observers, they were of the view that something needed to be 
done to address the issue.  
114. 
The Cook Islands drew the Commission’s attention to FFA Member views on this proposal 
contained in paper WCPFC14-2017-DP08 Views on Observer Safety and Korea's Proposed CMM on 
Observer Conduct. FFA Members thanked Korea and Japan but could not support the joint proposal 
on ROP observer conduct. Their foremost concern was supporting strengthening and improving the 
safety and welfare of observers. CMM 2016-03 on observer safety was only a starting point, and work 
must continue to assist the observers. FFA Members had commenced work in the important area of 
observers’ insurance coverage and would share the results in due course. Key concerns with the 
25 
proposal include: Observer safety was FFA Members’ key focus, SIDS were not consulted for the 
CMM 2013-06 SIDS impact assessment and therefore did not believe this was undertaken properly, 
several aspects of the proposal were already covered in the FFA Code of Conduct and in CMM 2007-
01, and some of the observer programmes applied more stringent national codes. There is already an 
existing form for a master to complete if there was a complaint about an observer and this was a matter 
best addressed at national level as recognised at the IWG-ROP meeting in July 2008, which rightly 
noted in particular that codes may need to vary to cater for cultural and religious sensitivities. FFA 
Members remained committed to improving national and sub-regional ROP programs. Cook Islands 
further echoed an earlier statement congratulating Japan for its internal work this year to ensure it could 
now fully implement CMM 2016-03.  
115. 
China and Chinese Taipei both indicated their support for the intent of the proposal.  Chinese 
Taipei noted such a proposal would improve observers conduct.  China indicated a preference that any 
issues related to observer behaviour are transparently addressed at the Commission. 
116. 
The Republic of Marshall Islands, Papua New Guinea and Tuvalu all expressed their support 
for the intervention by the Cook Islands and reiterated the view of FFA Members, that their priority 
was the safety of the observers. There was a fundamental problem that needed to be addressed relating 
to the difference between ROP observers and national programme observers. For purse seine vessels, 
observers were provided from within Commission member national programmes so regulations at the 
national level were already in place if there were incidents related to observers’ behaviour. The 
Commission was not advised of these issues because they were national issues.  
117. 
The TCC Chair noted that the TCC agreed at TCC13 to form a TCC working group on 
mechanisms to improve access to ROP observer reports. It was further suggested that perhaps the scope 
of the TCC working group could be expanded to give some consideration to this matter.  The suggestion 
was supported by the European Union.   
118. 
WWF indicated they supported the statements of RMI and Tuvalu. This proposal was put 
forward with very little evidence of misbehaviour of observers and little evidence of misconduct or 
failure of current processes. Therefore, this CMM was unnecessary at this time. As there was clear 
evidence of harm done to observers, there was an opportunity for this Commission to look at broader 
issues especially in regard to human rights issues on boats.  
119. 
 Korea addressed several of the key concerns raised namely: i) Regarding safety: the observer 
code of conduct was to ensure observer safety. It was regrettable that insurance was more important 
than observers. ii) Regarding CMM 2013-06: According to paragraph 3 of this CMM, the Commission 
shall apply 8 questions and carry out an impact assessment. This had not been done. There should be 
an assessment at the commission level to see who has additional burden. iii) This proposal was about 
what could be achieved at Commission level for the observer programme in this region. Masters and 
crew were already subject to relevant codes of conduct under United Nations, International Maritime 
Organisation (IMO) and flag state regulations. In general Korea would like this proposed code of 
conduct to be implemented by all CCMs, so this Commission could be a leading model amongst all 
RFMOs, while being respectful of different cultures and religions. It further noted there was an appeals 
process, which gave observers a chance to appeal misbehaviour complaints. Korea indicated being 
open to removing this text if it was seen to be problematic. The intention was to reduce the risk of 
violence on board.  
120. 
Japan responded to comments on lack of evidence, reiterating that some of the observers were 
actually arrested by police and that this was clear evidence. The objective was to reduce the numbers 
of incidents on board fishing vessels and after the observer disembarks the vessel. It asked members to 
consider further ways to rectify this situation.  
26 
121. 
The Chair summarised that there did not seem to be support for the proposal to be further 
considered at this meeting by an informal SWG.  However, there was some support for further 
consideration of this matter intersessionally through the TCC observer related working group.  The 
Chair suggested that CCMs give consideration to expanding the scope of the TCC’s ROP intersessional 
working group to allow for continuation of discussions related to observer code of conduct.  
122. 
Discussions continued under consideration of the TCC13 Report (Agenda Item 9.3) where 
some proposed language to expand the scope of the TCC observer related IWG to cover the related 
issues in WCPFC14-2017-DP19 was considered. FFA CCMs reiterated their position of non-support 
to the further consideration of the Korea and Japan proposal but did not rule out a possible general 
discussion of observer conduct by the TCC observer related IWG.    
123. 
WCPFC14 noted that TCC13 formed an intersessional working group to “address the 
need for CCMs to obtain copies of observer reports for their vessels in a timely manner so that 
they may fulfil their responsibility to undertake investigations of possible violations.  The 
group will explore ways to facilitate access to observer reports from both ROP Providers and 
the Secretariat, and will recommend possible improvements to the CMM for the Regional 
Observer Programme, the Agreed Minimum Standards and Guidelines of the Regional 
Observer Programme, and/or other Commission decisions.” (TCC13 Summary Report, para 
161). 
124. 
WCPFC14 agreed to expand the scope of work of that working group to include the 
issue of observer conduct, and tasked that working group to provide any recommendations to 
TCC14.  The working group should consider Korea and Japan’s proposal to WCPFC14 on 
observer conduct (WCPFC14-2017-DP19) and the deliberations of WCPFC14 on that 
proposal.   
4.5 
RFV CMM 2013-10 amendment  
125. 
Samoa, on behalf of FFA Members, introduced WCPFC14-2017-DP10 Proposal to amend 
paragraph 21 of CMM 2013-10. The proposal was to support the continued operation of Samoa’s 
domestic albacore longline fishing vessels (15m to 23m) that fish only in the Samoa EEZ, but unload 
their catch in neighbouring American Samoa. This would be achieved by avoiding the operational costs 
that would be incurred by Samoan vessel owners in configuring their domestic vessels to meet 
Commission VMS standards in cases where they offload in Pago Pago.  
126. 
Samoa, in response to a question of clarification from Japan seeking clarification about how 
many fishing vessels would be exempted by the proposal, clarified that the exemption would only apply 
to four vessels and none of them operated or fished on the high seas. They only operated in Samoa’s 
EEZ which was the smallest in the region. The “adjacent port” referenced in the initial draft submitted 
for consideration was American Samoa and was only 40 miles away. The intent was that these vessels 
could also use that adjacent CCM’s port for the purpose of unloading its catch in that port.  
127. 
In the margins of this meeting the United States and other interested CCMs worked with 
Samoa on revising the text of the proposal as contained at WCPFC14-2017-DP10_rev3.  
128. 
The Commission agreed to adopt CMM 2017-05 Conservation and Management 
Measure for the Record of Fishing Vessels and Authorisation to Fish (Attachment G), which 
will replace CMM 2013-10.   
27 
4.6 
Marine Pollution  
129. 
The Republic of the Marshall Islands, on behalf of FFA Members, introduced WCPFC14-
2017-DP15 Proposal for a Conservation and Management Measure to limit marine pollution from 
fishing vessels. This new conservation measure was designed to address concerns that certain activities 
associated with fishing may affect the Western and Central Pacific marine environment and that these 
activities may play a notable role in WCPFC’s efforts to minimise incidental mortality of non-target 
species and impacts on marine ecosystems. Abandoned, lost or otherwise discarded fishing gear in the 
marine environment can damage marine, reef and coastal habitats, be harmful to marine life through 
ghost fishing, entanglement, ingestion and acting as habitat for the spread of invasive species, and 
became a navigation hazard. This proposal encouraged CCMs to better implement the International 
Maritime Organisation (IMO) legal instruments developed to address marine pollution they are party 
to; and encourage others to become party to these instruments at the earliest possible opportunity.  
130. 
A number of CCMs spoke in support of the proposal and its objective, and expressed their 
appreciation to FFA members for taking the initiative.  Some CCMs indicated they already provided 
some draft amendments on the proposal.  There was agreement to have further discussions on the 
proposal through an informal SWG led by RMI. The final version of the proposal is contained at 
WCPFC14-2017-DP15_rev3.   
131. 
The Commission agreed to adopt CMM 2017-04 Conservation and Management 
Measure on Marine Pollution (Attachment H), with a date of implementation on 1 January 
2019. 
AGENDA ITEM 5 – SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS OF DEVELOPING STATES  
5.1 
Updated checklist evaluation of SIDS special requirements (FFA)  
132. 
Tokelau, on behalf of FFA Members, introduced WCPFC14-2017-DP07 Special 
Requirement Fund, which was a key priority for FFA Members. The paper built on discussions at 
WCPFC13 regarding the voluntary nature of the Fund and the need to ensure its sustainability, 
especially for supporting the travel needs of SIDS nationals to participate in meetings. TCC13 
recommended that WCPFC14 consider an approach to address the specific challenge of making the 
links between which sources of assistance can best meet SIDS and Territories’ needs, and how that 
assistance can be systematically tracked to ensure its delivery. As the complexity and diversity of issues 
for the Commission’s consideration had expanded and evolved, it had become impossible for one SIDS 
representative to cover all issues at these meetings. It proposed funding for 2 SIDS’ participants to 
Commission-related meetings through an amendment to the Financial Regulations. In previous 
discussions FFA members have asserted that disproportionate burden on SIDS can apply either as 
outcomes from the adoption of measures or as an administrative burden to adequately participate in the 
work of the Commission and funding an additional delegate will be a tangible way of addressing this 
second component. If the Commission could agree to amend the Financial Regulations, FFA members 
could agree that mandatory contributions to the SRF were not required for the time being.  
133. 
FFA Members further thanked those that had contributed to the Fund and advised that its 
Members continued to draw on this important source of assistance. FFA Members also proposed that 
the Commission revisit the question of mandatory contributions at the end of the 3 year trial period for 
the Strategic Investment Plan (SIP) to ensure the Fund had been maintained and there had been no 
issues with availing funds in response to SIDS’ needs. They also proposed strengthening the Principles, 
Guidelines and Operational Procedures for this Fund to assist the WCPFC Executive Director in 
assessing and selecting projects to be funded from the Special Requirements Fund. 
28 
134. 
Fiji, on behalf of FFA, reiterated that addressing the Special Requirements of Developing 
States was a high priority and an issue that would arise throughout the Commission meeting. There 
was a clear need to ‘join the dots’ between SIDS’ needs (individual and collective) and sources of 
assistance. At WCPFC11, FFA Members tabled a SIDS Checklist to set their specific needs which 
assisted in prioritising the assistance received from the Commission and developed CCMs. WCPFC11 
agreed that this be considered as a “guide to assist developed CCMs to assess the status of assistance 
to SIDS”. As advised to WCPFC13, FFA Members were considering an approach to the SIDS Checklist 
to make it an effective and efficient tool. In the meantime, the SIDS Checklist consisted of the capacity 
needs identified in the Final Compliance Monitoring Report, and were to be treated as priority areas 
requiring assistance. Fiji thanked the IWG- Special Requirement Fund Chair Liz Brierley of Australia 
for her hard work to coordinate views since WCPFC13 on the issue of ensuring the sustainability of 
the Special Requirements Fund. 
135. 
Fiji further noted that in WCPFC14-2017-DP07, FFA Members supported the concept of the 
Strategic Investment Plan (SIP). They viewed this as the overall mechanism for making the links 
between the SIDS’ needs and funding sources. It would assist with pulling all capacity needs together, 
guiding investments and identifying sources of funding. In setting out SIDS’ priority needs, they saw 
the SIP incorporating the concept of the ‘FFA SIDS Checklist’ –– essentially, this SIDS-driven Plan 
would include the priority areas of assistance as articulated by SIDS. They recognised that resources 
would be required to develop the SIP, and proposes that the Commission allocate funds for this work 
to take place in 2018. FFA also concurred with the IWG Chair’s proposal that the SIP is established 
for a 3-year trial period. 
136. 
The Chair noted that these discussions were also ongoing at the Finance and Administration 
Committee which would be reported back to plenary.  
5.2 
CCM reports on the implementation of Article 30 
137. 
The Republic of the Marshall Islands, on behalf of FFA members supported the comments 
made earlier in relation to the better implementation of CMM 2013-06. It reiterated the sentiments 
made when it introduced the paper WCPFC14-2017-DP11 Implementation of CMM 2013-06, under 
Agenda Item 4.1 It reiterated the point FFA Members had made that Article 30 was about making this 
Commission a success by accounting for the vulnerabilities of all SIDS in all work of the Commission. 
138. 
Tonga, on behalf of FFA Members, regretfully noted that after close analysis there was the 
impression that not all CCMs took the 2013-06 process seriously. Some did, and SIDS were particularly 
grateful to those that actually consulted SIDS before they prepare their CMM2013-06 responses. It 
urged all proponents of CMMs to do the same to save time during Commission meetings, as early 
consultation would more likely to lead to agreement. Any proposal that did not include or seriously 
address CMM 2013-06 requirements would need to be revised before it could be considered by FFA 
members in the future. CMM 2013-06 was a binding measure that expressed a fundamental principle 
of the Convention. FFA Members drew particular attention to Rev 5 of the tropical tuna bridging 
measure, which contained numerous specific proposals that had not been assessed under CMM 2013-
06. This made it challenging to determine whether or not the end result would be fit for purpose and 
would avoid placing a disproportionate burden on SIDS. This is why FFA Members have called for 
proponents of specific proposals in the Rev 5 bridging measure to provide assessments as part of this 
discussion. PNA Members had provided a comprehensive analysis of their own proposals and FFA 
Members would continue to monitor this as the measure is being developed. During the course of this 
meeting careful attention would be given to the way that proposals stack up against the CMM 2013-06 
criteria. And over the course of 2018 FFA Members would be thinking about better mechanisms to 
assess the conformity of Commission measures, requirements and procedures against CMM 2013-06 
standards. 
29 
139. 
Niue reiterated the FFA Members’ position on this issue. SIDS were not looking for 
development assistance from this Commission. Development assistance was a separate process covered 
by separate intergovernmental processes. Assistance through the Commission and its processes needed 
to continually focus on ways and means to ensure that the Commission as a whole could achieve its 
objectives. The Commission needed to demonstrate: i) A fair voice in the work of the Commission; ii) 
A commitment to management measures that both avoid placing a disproportionate burden on SIDS 
and provide a fair share of the benefits from fishing the resources in their regions; iii) Technical or 
financial assistance that was oriented towards meeting critical capacity or resource constraints that 
would otherwise prevent CMMs from being agreed by SIDS, or would result in SIDS simply not being 
able to meet their obligations; iv) Greater policy coherency so that the generosity and support of 
developed CCMs through their donor roles and general foreign policies was not undermined by 
WCPFC positions focussed solely on the financial interests of their fishing fleets. 
140. 
The European Union advised that WCPFC14-2017-DP23 Report of the European Union on 
Article 30 of the Convention and Resolution 2008-01 of WCPFC, was posted which detailed its 
implementation of Article 30. European Union’s development assistance to the Pacific amounted to 
about €45 million which was negotiated with several regional organisations including the FFA and 
SPC. It addressed the development needs of the Pacific as determined through regional processes. Some 
of the identified priorities include combatting IUU fishing and building capacity in the area of scientific 
services. European Union mentioned that €1 million has been earmarked to cater for the compliance 
capacity needs identified by TCC to assist with enhanced capacity of members to comply with their 
obligations under CMMs.    
141. 
Japan had noted that it understood the importance of CMM 2013-06 criteria and had 
undertaken a number of consultations with FFA Members in relation to the tropical tuna measure and 
the port states measure resulting in a joint proposal for the latter. No consultation was undertaken in 
respect of the proposal for code of conduct for observers as it thought there would be no 
disproportionate burden from what was proposed. Japan stated that they would continue to have prior 
consultation with other members as much as possible.  Japan continued to provide overseas 
development assistance to Pacific islands through JICA and Overseas Fishery Cooperation Foundation 
of Japan (OFCF) for infrastructure and provision of technical services. In the last 5 years Japan 
provided about $740 million in development assistance to the Pacific Islands focusing on fisheries 
related projects that cover management of highly migratory fish stocks and assistance to small scale 
fisheries. At the last Pacific Leaders Meeting with the Prime Minister of Japan (PALM7), Prime 
Minister Abe pledged no less than $500 million development assistance plus human resources 
development assistance for no less than 4,000 people. Japan also provides the Japan Trust Fund and 
the OFCF Promotion Fund with FFA which was recently extended for another 10 years due to a strong 
request from Pacific Island countries. 
142. 
Chinese Taipei drew attention to its work on technical assistance and joint fishing conservation 
and management activities. It referred to the establishment of the Chinese Taipei Trust Fund last year 
that supported capacity building efforts of the SIDS. It further advised that Chinese Taipei also assisted 
in building fishing vessels for SIDS under request. Chinese Taipei continued to encourage its private 
sector to invest in the fishing sector through development cooperation with the SIDS. 
143. 
Republic of Korea explained that it continued to provide development assistance to SIDS 
focusing in two main areas. Firstly, capacity building through education. Korea provided assistance for 
the establishment of the school of Technical and Marine Studies in the Solomon Islands that would 
open in February 2018 and would welcome students from other SIDS. Korea had also opened a pilot 
project on the World Fisheries University under the auspices of FAO to provide quality education for 
developing States in the fisheries sector. Secondly, it had focused on preventing IUU fishing through 
enhanced MCS capacity by assisting with the establishment of remote monitoring systems designed to 
be particularly useful to CCMs with vast EEZs but lacked the systems to monitor their large waters. 
30 
144. 
Kiribati acknowledged the funding support available for SIDS through the Commission which 
had benefitted Kiribati and other SIDS in understanding their obligations and their capacity to comply 
with those obligations. Kiribati encouraged developed CCMs to continue this funding support and 
encouraged CCMs with new proposals to consult with SIDS during the development of those proposals.  
5.3 
Review of implementation of CMM 2013-07 (Paragraph 20)  
145. 
The Chair suggested that since a lot of discussion on this issue had already occurred and that 
it would continue throughout the meeting, the floor would not be open for further discussion.  
AGENDA ITEM 6 – HARVEST STRATEGY 
146. 
Discussion under this agenda item centred around the Agreed Work Plan for the Adoption of 
Harvest Strategies under CMM 2014-06, covering skipjack, bigeye, yellowfin, and South Pacific 
albacore (WCPFC14-2017-IP02).  
147. 
Australia, at the invitation of the Chair, introduced WCPFC14-2017-DP27 Possible revision 
to Harvest Strategy Workplan.  This paper contained some suggested changes to the workplan for 
CCMs to consider including: i). extending the current workplan out to 2021 to allow for the ongoing 
work towards adoption of harvest strategies for the four of the key tuna stocks; ii) reframing the work 
on bigeye and yellowfin tuna given the recent scientific advice on the status of bigeye from rebuilding 
timeline to developing a target reference point; and iii) proposing a dedicated discussion in 2018 by SC 
and the Commission of management objectives in terms of candidate target reference points for bigeye 
and yellowfin. Australia recognised the clear need for decisions to be made at this meeting to ensure 
progress beyond 2017 and a clear need to stagger the development of harvest control strategies for four 
of the key tuna stocks to accommodate the capacity limitations of the scientific service provider SPC. 
New Zealand has generously donated funding to SPC to facilitate further progress on harvest strategy 
work for bigeye and yellowfin. Australia offered during WCPFC14 to update the workplan to take into 
account the progress made through the harvest strategy agenda items since WCPFC13, and to provide 
a draft revised Harvest Strategy Workplan for adoption by WCPFC14. It welcomed feedback from 
CCMs on the proposed revisions and other suggestions.  
148. 
Papua New Guinea, on behalf of FFA members, noted their concerns with the lack of time and 
resources the Commission and its subsidiary bodies had committed to progressing the development of 
harvest strategies as the key mechanism for moving the management of WCPO fisheries to a 
strategically managed stock approach. Multiple agenda items with no papers to support discussions, 
and inadequate time allocated to SWGs at the Commission and SC to progress key elements such as 
performance indicators, ultimately resulted in ongoing delays to the adoption of the harvest strategy 
workplan. FFA Members thanked Australia for providing potential amendments to and extension of 
the workplan, as it reflected the Commissions agreement to a stepwise approach towards harvest 
strategies, with concurrent work on all of the main stocks. Future possible amendments could also 
include the addition of other Commission stocks, such as north Pacific albacore, and Pacific bluefin 
tuna.  
149. 
The Chair appreciated the concerns expressed over the lack of sufficient time available to the 
Commission to fully consider the development of harvest strategies and asked for suggestions from 
concerned CCMs on how the Commission agenda should be restructured to allow for more time to be 
devoted to harvest strategies. The Chair noted the growing number of priority issues for the CCMs and 
the time constraint posed by the allotted five meeting days has made it challenging for the Commission 
to commit the necessary and adequate attention to a number of important issues. 
31 
150. 
The United States appreciated Australia’s efforts to keep the Commission on track with this 
workplan, and supported an annual review of the document to make adjustments where necessary. 
Regarding proposed tasks for 2018 and the proposed changes for bigeye and yellowfin in reference to 
the discussion on management objectives and candidate target reference points (TRP) for these species, 
the US pointed out that the Commission has been discussing management objectives of fisheries more 
broadly over the last several years, i.e. for the tropical purse seine fishery and this year for the tropical 
longline fishery. The US suggested the reference in the workplan for 2017 to performance indicators 
for longline fisheries should be broken into tropical longline, and southern longline performance 
indicators.   
151. 
The European Union noted that this work was fundamental to the Commission’s future 
management of all its stocks as it moved towards management strategies and harvest control rules. 
Therefore, it was necessary to dedicate more time to look into these issues, and it should also be 
specifically accounted for in the budget of the Commission because it was such a critical issue. SWGs 
did not allow for enough dedicated time and resources to consider this issue, and not every CCM had 
the capacity to participate in these groups. The European Union noted there was still some confusion 
about this complex conceptual framework, and considered it easier if various elements were adopted 
as interim measures, so there was more flexibility to revise them before a framework was built.  
152. 
The Republic of Korea appreciated Australia’s proposed amendments to reflect practicalities 
without losing the good progress made at previous meetings. It agreed that work scheduled last year 
was rushed and accordingly the plan seemed a bit ambitious. It supported that the work plan should be 
a living document that could be amended from time to time.   
153. 
Japan expressed concerns with the proposed way forward for skipjack, noting the Commission 
already had a separate CMM with a target reference point (TRP) for skipjack, which clearly noted the 
TRP would be reviewed by the Commission no later than 2019. It asked that the workplan is updated 
to duly reflect CMM 2015-06. It also noted the deferral of adoption of a target reference point for South 
Pacific albacore at WCPFC13, had indicated at the time that the adoption of a TRP for south Pacific 
albacore would be the likely focus for this meeting.  Considering the number of SWGs focusing on 
other issues at this meeting, it noted there will likely not be same time available as last year to consider 
other species, so there may be a need for an intersessional meeting to continue discussion on a TRP for 
South Pacific albacore. In general, it was noted that it would be difficult to agree on a way forward for 
the work plan until the whole package could be seen.  
154. 
Tokelau noted that at this stage PNA Members did not support any further workshops or other 
intersessional meetings dedicated to harvest strategy discussions, as SIDS had limited resources 
available to attend additional meetings. PNA Members preferred this issue being discussed at 
Commission meetings as one of the key issues, and TRPs should remain the focus, however suggested 
that a one-day workshop alongside SC14 could be one way to align managers and scientists to make 
progress on harvest strategy work. When PNA Members agreed to the Harvest Strategy Workplan, they 
did so on the basis that this work would be integrated into the work of the SC, TCC and the 
Commission, and not involve additional subsidiary bodies or meetings. They found the earlier 
Management Objectives Workshops very useful for exchanging ideas and building understanding on 
management objectives and the application of reference points and harvest control rules. However, the 
value of the workshops declined over time as the discussions shifted from general approaches to more 
specific issues on which decisions need to be taken, and the workshops were not effective when 
recommendations needed to be developed for Commission consideration.  PNA Members further noted 
that the Management Issues theme of the SC had been a very effective forum for similar discussions 
on issues related to reference points and harvest control rules and thought that should continue to be 
the focal point for the Commission’s work on harvest strategies. As a compromise, PNA was prepared 
to consider trying a one-day workshop in association with the SC. The aim of this would be to provide 
an opportunity for promoting dialogue between managers and scientists on harvest strategy work. In 
32 
putting this forward, they wanted to make it clear that they had real doubts about the value of the 
workshop type approach to advancing the Harvest Strategy work. 
155. 
Indonesia thanked Australia for their leadership on the Harvest Strategy Workplan and noted 
that this process was very important for the movement towards strategic management of all stocks in 
the WCPO. When considering the Workplan, the information provided in the draft workplan addressed 
harvest strategy in relation to TRPs and mostly focused on the development of indicators. However, in 
2016 candidate management objectives were recorded and this Workplan still did not provide a clear 
way forward to achieve all those objectives.  
156. 
The European Union, in response to the views of FFA and PNA Members on additional 
meetings, considered that it would be difficult to facilitate the attendance of managers and 
commissioners at an SC meeting and therefore the proposal for a one day workshop at the margins of 
the Scientific Committee in their view would have limited benefit. The Commission already had an 
adopted Workplan that guides its work, but it needed to be more effective about making decisions. The 
European Union considered making progress on this issue to be a high priority and would prefer to 
have a dedicated workshop back to back with the Annual Meeting to facilitate appropriate participation.   
157. 
Australia considered the Harvest Strategy Workplan a key priority, and while it recognised the 
European Union’s views, it was happy to endorse the position of PNA Members and look at an extra 
day at the SC. They believed extra time from the Commission also needed to be found, and it was also 
critical that all members had a strong commitment to make progress i.e. on the South Pacific albacore 
TRP which had already suffered many years of delay. With respect to the query from Indonesian on 
how the management objectives would develop into harvest strategies to achieve those objectives, 
Australia pointed out that a set of performance indicators and management strategies were developed 
in 2017. The next step was to have SPC, assess whether those performance indicators have been 
achieved against those objectives. Australia further recognised that not every objective can be achieved 
and that trade-offs might be necessary. Australia indicated its willingness to further discuss these issues 
with interested delegations in the margins of the meeting.  
158. 
Pew Charitable Trusts, on behalf of Pew Charitable Trusts, WWF, Sustainable Fisheries 
Partnership, Environmental Defense Fund, ISSF, Greenpeace, and International Pole and Line 
Foundation, expressed concern that despite a harvest strategy being a clear priority for the Commission 
and critical to resolving many of its key challenges including ensuring sustainability, the continued 
refusal to accept progress will mean additional work and intersessional meetings are necessary. Either 
the Commission is serious about this process, or it is not. Whether progress is made intersessionally or 
within the existing Commission processes, it needs to happen. They collectively thanked Australia for 
the revised work plan, and strongly urged all CCMs to commit to the appropriate level of activity 
needed to achieve the work plan.  
159. 
Australia noted the importance of committing sufficient time to harvest strategy discussions 
and welcomed working with other CCMs in the margins of the meeting to develop a way forward for 
a proposal that could be agreed on at this meeting. This was agreed as a way forward to progress the 
revision of the Harvest Strategy Workplan.  The further discussions and the outcome for the update of 
the Harvest Strategy Workplan are recorded under Agenda 6.9.   
160. 
Following the initial consideration of the Harvest Strategy Workplan, the Chair led discussions 
through each of the Agenda 6 sub-agenda items.  Prior to commencing this discussion it was clarified 
that the NC13 outcomes would provide the basis for discussions on Agenda item 6.8.  
 
 
33 
6.1 
Management objectives (all stocks/fisheries) 
161. 
The Chair reminded that at WCPFC13, the Commission accepted the suggested initial list of 
performance indicators for tropical purse-seine fisheries as developed by the Small Working Group on 
Management Objectives at WCPFC13 for the purpose of the evaluation of harvest control rules 
(Attachment M, WCPFC13 Summary Report).   
162. 
The United States noted the outcome from SC13 related to candidate performance indicators 
and monitoring strategies for tropical longline and southern longline fisheries and noted that papers 
providing a potential list of performance indicators were contained in WCPFC14-2017-IP02 and 
WCPFC14-2017-IP03.  The United States confirmed that they would like to review the list of potential 
performance indicators to be used for the management strategy evaluation in longline fisheries at 
WCPFC14.  The Chair asked that this be raised under Agenda Item 6.7.   
6.2 
Acceptable levels of risk (all stocks)  
163. 
The Chair referred the meeting to WCPFC13 draft summary report paragraph 296, which 
stated that “Commission agreed to: i) not specify, at this time, acceptable levels of risk of breaching 
the limit reference point for each stock; ii) consider any risk level greater than 20 percent to be 
inconsistent with the LRP related principle in UNFSA (as referenced in Article 6 of the Convention) 
including that the risk of breaching limit reference points be very low; and iii) determine the 
acceptability of potential HCRs where the estimated risk of breaching the limit reference point is 
between 0 and 20%.”   
164. 
Japan stressed that the Commission had already agreed that the risk of breaching LRP shall be 
no more than 20% and other CCMs should respect this in considering the new CMM for tropical tunas, 
particularly with respect to bigeye tuna.  
165. 
The European Union sought clarification on whether the decision last year on acceptable levels 
of risk was an interim decision, or whether the TRP for South Pacific albacore being considered at this 
meeting was the interim measure, as there was mixed reference in papers submitted to this meeting for 
consideration.  
166. 
Tuvalu and other FFA members were of the view that given no new information had been 
presented to the Commission suggesting the decision be reviewed, FFA members did not support a 
review of the decision made at WCPFC13 to not specify acceptable levels of risk at this time. The level 
of acceptable risk appropriate for a particular species depended on various other elements of the harvest 
strategy, including the Limit and Target Reference Points, the current status of the stock, and the 
economic implications of Harvest Control Rules that achieve the TRP. Given that most of these 
elements are yet to be developed for most species, it would be premature to agree to a fixed acceptable 
level of risk when the consequences of that decision could not be understood.  
167. 
Tokelau on behalf of PNA members supported the intervention made by Tuvalu and FFA 
members. In response to the European Union’s question on what was agreed at the last meeting, 
Tokelau noted that the decision language could be found in paragraph 296 of the WCPFC13 Summary 
Report.   
168. 
The Chair noted that the decision taken last year on acceptable levels of risk would not be 
reopened and agreed that papers submitted to future meetings should use language consistent with the 
agreed decisions of previous meetings. 
34 
6.3 
Review of rebuilding timeline (bigeye tuna)  
169. 
Australia, on behalf of FFA members noted that given that the latest stock assessment showed 
that the bigeye stock was not experiencing overfishing and was not in an overfished condition, FFA 
members were of the view that there was no longer a need for a rebuilding timeframe for bigeye. 
170. 
The Chair agreed that in the light of recent updates of scientific advice this work plan item for 
a rebuilding plan for bigeye was no longer relevant.  The Chair asked that Australia take this update 
into account in revising the Harvest Strategy Workplan.  
6.4 
Target reference point (South Pacific albacore tuna)  
171. 
Samoa, on behalf of FFA Members, introduced WCPFC14-2017-DP13 Proposal for 
Establishing a Target Reference Point for South Pacific Albacore, which proposed a brief and simple 
CMM that would establish a target reference point (TRP) for the stock that reflected a management 
objective for the benefit all CCMs with a real interest in the fishery: that of increasing south Pacific 
albacore catch rates over a period of time. It was noted that for the last three years there had not been 
any credible alternative proposals tabled by CCMs in response to the element in the Harvest Strategy 
Workplan that was agreed under CMM 2014-06. FFA members were very aware of the effort 
reductions required in this fishery before it could be restored to a reasonable level of financial 
sustainability, and the undeniable development impacts that this will have on many SIDS. FFA 
Members further noted that future allocation of reductions and the potential distribution of conservation 
burdens would need to be very carefully considered by the Commission in the design of management 
measures to achieve the TRP over time. A precautionary approach should be taken to avoid placing a 
disproportionate burden on developing small-island coastal CCMs. FFA Members further noted that 
the South Pacific albacore stock was the basis for the only commercially viable tuna fishery in several 
Pacific SIDS. In recent years declining catch rate required wholesale vessel tie-ups in many domestic 
fleets. The lower than average fuel prices lately allowed some fleets to continue fishing, particularly 
those that enjoyed operational subsidies. However, if the Commission allows the stock to continue to 
drop, even those fleets will not be able to operate. Last year some CCMs could not accept the idea of a 
spawning biomass-based TRP, so the seventeen FFA CCMs have agreed to change the basis of the 
TRP proposal. Instead of maintaining a certain level of spawning biomass, a relative longline catch rate 
would be maintained. It was proposed that relative catch rates in the fishery be increased over the next 
ten years to 10% higher than 2013 levels, and over the next twenty years to 17% higher than 2013 
levels. As it was difficult to track fleet-specific or average longline catch rates directly, the proposal 
has taken on board the suggestion from the Commission’s scientific service provider and uses “longline 
Vulnerable Biomass” as the indicator for average longline CPUE. This catch-rate TRP has several 
advantages over a spawning biomass TRP. Further details are contained in the paper. FFA Members 
noted that the proposal sets a modest timeframe of twenty years for achieving its target, and urged that 
the Commission take steps at this meeting to adopt a TRP as proposed noting that the proposal sought 
to provide a reasonable proposal that should be more acceptable to all Members. FFA members look 
forward to working with all CCMs towards achieving agreement on a TRP at this meeting at SWG, 
noting that the Commission had agreed at WCPFC13 to not defer adoption of a TRP for South Pacific 
albacore beyond this meeting.   
172. 
Environmental Defense Fund, on behalf of Environmental Defense Fund, WWF, Greenpeace, 
ISSF, Sustainable Fisheries Partnership, International Pole and Line Foundation and Pew Charitable 
Trusts, delivered a statement.  They thanked FFA and New Zealand for their leadership to advance 
management of South Pacific albacore, and they acknowledged how the proposal had evolved since 
the last meeting.  The southern longline fishery, whilst not generating the same volume of economic 
return as the tropical fisheries, nonetheless was a vital component of many Small Island Developing 
States’ economies.  Unfortunately, the fishery is no longer economically viable, catch rates are 
declining and the Scientific Committee has advised that fishing mortality and catch need to be reduced.  
35 
It was highlighted that WCPFC14-2017-IP08 Trends in the South Pacific albacore longline and troll 
fisheries makes it clear that there is an expectation that vulnerable biomass is expected to continue to 
decrease.  The Harvest Strategy framework is a critical part of the future management framework for 
this fishery.  The adoption of a target reference point is also a critical for many fisheries obtaining MSC 
certification, which is an important financial incentive for these fisheries. The South Pacific albacore 
TRP was supposed to be adopted by the Commission in 2015, it is now two years overdue from the 
original Commission decision. They strongly urge CCMs to work together to adopt a TRP for South 
Pacific albacore at this meeting.   
173. 
The Pacific Islands Tuna Industry Association (PITIA) expressed their concern and strongly 
urged that the Commission come to agreement on the harvest strategy elements that were committed 
to under the Harvest Strategy Workplan, including the adoption of a TRP for South Pacific albacore.  
This fishery is in dire circumstances, catch rates cannot support the current costs of fishing, leaving 
many fishing companies barely surviving.  Catch rates continue to fall, and the inability of the 
Commission to curb the increases in catches in the high seas is seen to be a failure to manage the 
fisheries under its charge.  PITIA strongly urged the Commission to take the necessary steps at this 
meeting to ensure the long-term sustainability and future viability of the southern longline fisheries for 
the future.     
174. 
Members agreed to establish an informal SWG led by New Zealand to consider both the draft 
bridging measure and the proposal for a TRP. 
175. 
New Zealand reported on the outcomes from the SWG on South Pacific albacore in respect of 
the proposed TRP. The proposal from FFA members (WCPFC14-2017-DP13) was the only formal 
proposal received for consideration by the SWG. New Zealand further noted that there was a lengthy 
discussion on the TRP issue over the course of the meeting and regretted that no consensus could be 
reached. While most CCMs strongly supported progress being made to adopt a South Pacific albacore 
TRP at this meeting, there were two Members who maintained their position that a decision should not 
be made on a South Pacific albacore TRP this year. These members wanted to see the result of the 
stock assessment next year and based on the consideration of the outcome of the stock assessment, the 
Commission (at WCPFC15) could decide whether the TRP was necessary. New Zealand expressed 
disappointment that consensus could not be reached at this meeting and particularly given that the 
decision on TRP was deferred from WCPFC13 to this meeting.  
176. 
Fiji, on behalf of FFA Members and many Participating Territories, asked that the Commission 
adopt the TRP as proposed by FFA at this meeting. It fully supported the roadmap that was presented 
by New Zealand as the outcome of the SWG. The harvest strategy would be more directed and focused 
if there was TRP agreed at this meeting. In the absence of a TRP the process was an open ended one 
and the Commission’s work would go in circles. Fiji strongly emphasised its great disappointment with 
its engagement in this forum over the last fifteen years was that there had not been sufficient 
management consideration of South Pacific albacore by this Commission. It was time for the 
Commission to make definitive progress on harvest strategy for South Pacific albacore at this meeting. 
Fiji stated its view that it is not appropriate to wait for the next stock assessment and the Commission 
must make a decision at this meeting.   
177. 
New Caledonia confirmed their support to the statement of Fiji and its proposed way forward.   
178. 
China thanked New Zealand for leading the SWG. This year it had repeatedly mentioned that 
it cannot agree to the proposed TRP. Time at this meeting was limited and China was focused on the 
tropical tuna bridging measure. It was premature for China to accept the FFA Members’ TRP proposal.   
179. 
Chinese Taipei thanked the FFA Members for their proposal but it aligned itself with the 
comments from China. Next year the Commission would have the South Pacific albacore stock 
36 
assessment and SC14 would provide advice on harvest control rules so it believed a decision on a TRP 
was premature. A cautious approach should be taken and the Commission should defer the adoption of 
a TRP to the next meeting.  
180. 
Fiji expressed disagreement with the position of China and Chinese Taipei for the Commission 
to wait another year before considering a TRP. It urged that the Commission could not afford to play 
the waiting game on this issue anymore. A clear workplan and harvest strategy had been provided in 
the proposal with a modest timeframe set out to achieve the target, all with a view to achieving 
consensus – cuts were not being asked to be taken immediately. It reiterated the overwhelming support 
for adopting a South Pacific albacore TRP at this meeting, and noted its intention to propose a vote on 
this matter.  Given the economic importance of the southern longline fisheries to many Pacific Island 
countries and territories, the Commission could not wait any longer to take a decision on this matter.   
181. 
A majority of CCMs confirmed their support for the adoption of a TRP and acknowledged that 
the adoption of a TRP and further progress on the harvest strategy for South Pacific albacore was very 
important.  Some CCMs expressed disappointment and concern that not adopting a TRP at this meeting 
could be an excuse for further delay, affecting the financial sustainability of the fishery, particularly 
for SIDS and participating territories.   
182. 
WWF presented a statement on behalf of WWF, Environmental Defense Fund, PITIA and 
Greenpeace.  They concurred with Fiji’s recollection of past discussions, and confirmed that for years 
the aforementioned organisations had listened to impassioned pleas from numerous Pacific Islands 
States and territories with respect to falling catch rates for South Pacific albacore and yet only a few 
CCMs seem uninterested in fulfilling their responsibilities as members of this Commission and as 
global citizens.  They explained that despite the impassioned pleas and the voluminous information put 
before the Commission outlining the scientific and economic basis for a TRP, these few CCMs just 
don’t seem to care. They inferred that the actions by these CCMs implied a lack of care for the 
communities of the Pacific that are dependent on these fisheries resources, and moreover a lack of care 
for ensuring the health of the resource. They commended the enormous efforts made by CCMs who 
have been working to achieve compromise, and questioned the spirit of compromise of the other CCMs 
who had taken the position of waiting for the next meeting or the next stock assessment before being 
ready to agree to a TRP. They expressed concern that the argument to delay the adoption of a TRP was 
a delay tactic, to further delay management action.  They asked the CCMs that were not in a position 
to adopt a TRP, to confirm exactly what additional scientific evidence they would need before being 
ready to take a decision. Lastly it was noted that for some of the parties involved in this discussion, this 
was a circumstance of their own making – despite there being capacity limits in place for these fisheries 
for many years, some CCMs have continued to allow the number of longline fishing vessels to increase 
and it should not be surprising that the number of vessels will need to decrease sometime in the future.  
183. 
The Chair noted that at some point in this discussion the Commission needed to make a 
decision and that one Member had called for a vote and sought clarification on the views of other 
Members on this question specifically. After an initial discussion on this question, the Chair requested 
guidance from the Legal Advisor on the Rules of Procedures of the Commission for matters that need 
to be taken to a vote. 
184. 
The Legal Advisor, Dr Penny Ridings, referred members to Article 10 of the Convention.  
Article 10 (4) states “The Commission may adopt decisions relating to the allocation of the total 
allowable catch or the total level of fishing effort.  Such decisions, including decisions relating to the 
exclusion of vessel types, shall be taken by consensus.”  So, the question here, is whether the 
establishment of a TRP fits within the phrase of Article 10 (4)?  The Legal Advisor then noted her 
assessment was that the establishment of a TRP does not directly relate to the allocation of a total 
allowable catch, neither does it relate to the allocation of a total level of fishing effort.  Her assessment 
was that the adoption of a TRP for south Pacific albacore does not need to be taken by consensus.  
37 
Rather it is a decision that falls under the decision-making procedures of Article 20, where if all efforts 
to reach consensus have failed, voting could be taken which would require ¾ majority in each chamber.  
The procedures for undertaking a vote were outlined, confirming that a Member must call for a vote, 
and the Chair must set a time for a vote.  It was emphasised that the Chair must be of the view that all 
efforts to reach consensus have been exhausted.  It is also a requirement under our rules that delegations 
have credentials and that those Members who wish to participate in voting must have their credentials 
with the Secretariat.  The Legal Advisor suggested that the first matter to be decided should be whether 
the Chair was of the view that all efforts to reach consensus had been exhausted.   
185. 
In light of the Legal Advisor’s interpretation, a discussion on the way forward ensued.  Some 
CCMs expressed that they saw some linkage between the TRP and a decision on total allowable catch 
and/or allocation and indicated they had discomfort with taking a vote on a TRP proposal at this 
meeting.  Other CCMs expressed that the TRP would set a long-term target for the fishery that would 
contribute to the overall management framework that might include a total allowable catch, but the 
TRP did not mandate the Commission to adopt a total allowable catch.  The TRP certainly would not 
drive allocation, which would need to take into account the factors of Article 10 (3) of the Convention.  
Irrespective of their views on the interpretation of whether Article 10 (4) of the Convention applied, 
most CCMs confirmed their preference for a decision to be taken on a TRP by consensus where 
possible.   
186. 
The Legal Advisor provided a supplementary comment on the background to the negotiation 
of Article 10 (4) of the Convention.  There were two sides to the debate during the Multilateral High 
Level Conference (MHLC): one group thought all decisions should be by consensus and another 
thought that decisions could be by some form of majority.  In the end, it was agreed that those decisions 
that directly affected the economic viability of the fishing industries of Members would be taken by 
consensus, as well as those that affected the financial contribution of Commission Members.  That was 
why Article 10 (4) of the Convention was limited to the matters of total allowable catch and total 
allowable effort, and why the budget must be agreed by consensus.  If the scope of Article 10 (4) of the 
Convention was now expanded beyond what was intended at the time to something such as a TRP, it 
would mean that a lot more decisions of the Commission would need to be taken by consensus.  This 
would not be consistent with the intention of the negotiators at MHLC.  The purpose of a TRP is to be 
a goal to be met, it does not deal with allocation as such.  However, if the result of the establishment 
of a TRP is that there are limits set and allocations within the overall limit, then these would be matters 
that would be subject to Article 10 (4).   
187. 
The Chair suggested that discussion be suspended so she could have some time to further 
consult with concerned CCMs during a short break. Following informal consultations with some 
delegations, the Chair updated the Commission that compromise language had been developed that the 
Commission should be able to agree to by consensus and avoid the call for a vote. The meeting was 
asked in reviewing the draft language to consider that strong language was necessary to satisfy the 
concerns that a number of CCMs had of not being able to adopt a TRP at this meeting. The two 
Members that had been opposed to adoption of a TRPs this year had committed to adopt a TRP at 
WCPFC15.  
188. 
The Commission agreed to prioritise the development and adoption of a Target 
Reference Point for South Pacific albacore through the following actions:  
a. All CCMs with an interest in the Southern albacore fishery jointly commit to review 
available scientific and economic information to inform their position about appropriate goals 
for the fishery and corresponding candidate target reference points; 
38 
b. Regardless of the results of the 2018 stock assessment and the management advice from 
SC14 to WCPFC15, SC14 shall dedicate sufficient time in the Management Issues Theme to 
develop advice for WCPFC15 on candidate target reference points 
c. CCMs will work together in advance of WCPFC15 to develop TRP proposals; and 
d. WCPFC15 shall adopt a Target Reference Point for South Pacific albacore.    
6.5 
Harvest control rules (South Pacific albacore tuna and skipjack tuna)  
189. 
The Commission deferred consideration of this item to Agenda Item 6.9 - Review of the 
Workplan.  
6.6 
Management strategy evaluation (South Pacific albacore tuna and skipjack tuna)  
190. 
The Commission deferred discussion of this item to Agenda Item 6.9 - Review of the 
Workplan.  
6.7 
Monitoring Strategy and Performance Indicators (all stocks/fisheries)  
191. 
The United States noted that it had posted a proposed revision to the performance indicators 
for the tropical Tuna longline fishery in WCPFC14-2017-DP30 Performance Indicators and 
Monitoring Strategies for Bigeye and Yellowfin Tuna Compatible with Candidate Management 
Objectives for the Tropical Longline Fishery. It proposed an additional indicator of Maximum 
Sustainable Yield (MSY).  
192. 
The Commission was invited to note the candidate performance indicators and monitoring 
strategies for the tropical longline fishery and provide advice on what performance indicators and 
monitoring strategies should be included for this fishery for the development of harvest strategies under 
CMM 2014-06.  
193. 
The European Union supported this discussion but asked that this indicator apply to the purse 
seine fishery too. In response, the United States clarified that there was already an indicator in the purse 
seine fishery that was very similar to this.  
194. 
Japan confirmed their support for the US proposal in DP30.  
195. 
Tuvalu noted that FFA Members supported the recommendations from SC13 that the 
candidate lists of performance indicators and monitoring strategies for the Southern and Tropical 
Longline Fisheries be noted. While FFA Members supported the work SPC had done to develop the 
performance indicators on the basis of the MOW2 strawman paper, they were concerned that the 
Commission and its subsidiary bodies had not been allowed enough time to engage in the development 
of the various elements of the harvest strategy. The small working group at SC13 had very limited time 
to consider a long list of performance indicators and monitoring strategies before the list came to the 
Commission for the consideration of fisheries managers. There was simply not sufficient time to engage 
in refining and prioritising the long lists contained in the SC information papers and as a result FFA 
Members had no choice but to simply note these papers, on the understanding that there is a list of 
candidate performance indicators which may be used as appropriate as the harvest strategies evolve. 
196. 
The Chair agreed it was important to clarify that in WCPFC14-2017-DP30 the United States 
was only proposing that WCPFC14 note the candidate indicators, not adopt them at this meeting. More 
time will be needed to get to a point where these indicators could be recorded and then adopted.  
39 
197. 
The Commission noted the SC13 advice that in the short-term it was seen as best 
practice to support a broad range of performance indicators in support of the multiple 
management objectives already identified by the Commission. However, SC13 noted that there 
will be scope to iteratively refine both the management objectives and related performance 
indicators and monitoring strategies in light of the outcomes of the current Harvest Strategy 
Work Plan and the development of the management framework within the WCPFC.   
198. 
The Commission noted the candidate performance indicators and monitoring strategies 
for south Pacific albacore commensurate with candidate management objectives for the 
Southern Longline Fishery to be considered in the development of harvest strategies under 
CMM 2014-06 (Attachment K, Table 1). 
199. 
The Commission noted the candidate performance indicators and monitoring strategies 
for bigeye and yellowfin tuna commensurate with candidate management objectives for the 
Tropical Longline Fishery to be considered in the development of harvest strategies under 
CMM 2014-06 (Attachment K, Table 2). 
6.8 
Harvest Strategy for Pacific bluefin tuna and North Pacific albacore  
200. 
The NC Vice-Chair Mr Michael Tosatto (United States) provided an update on the status of 
the harvest strategy workplan for the Pacific bluefin tuna. A 2nd Joint IATTC-WCPFC NC Working 
Group on Pacific Bluefin Management was held, which reviewed the current CMM, emergency rule 
and catch documentation scheme. It also addressed the second rebuilding target and timeline and long-
term precautionary approach. The Northern Committee had developed four harvest strategies which 
were targeted. Because an interim CMM already existed with an initial rebuilding target, a second 
rebuilding target was established, alongside a recruitment scenario with the help of International 
Scientific Committee (ISC) and a monitoring strategy to ensure the initial target was met by 2024. A 
number of rebuilding targets and a performance evaluation had been put in place with the assistance of 
the ISC. A short paper on development of the catch documentation scheme was included in Attachment 
E of NC13 Summary Report, and harvest strategy information was included in Attachment F. NC13’s 
key recommendation was: 
“NC13 recommends that the Commission adopt the Harvest Strategy for Pacific Bluefin Tuna 
Fisheries (Attachment F), and recommends that the Commission direct the Secretariat to make 
this harvest strategy available, as a stand alone harvest strategy document, on a web page 
dedicated to this and other harvest strategies, including interim harvest strategies, adopted by 
the Commission”.  
 
201. 
New Zealand noted that it and other FFA Members had been highly critical at the last two 
Commission meetings of the lack of progress on the proposed harvest strategy for Pacific bluefin tuna. 
It congratulated the Northern Committee for their work and generally supported the proposed way 
forward.  
202. 
Pew Charitable Trust, on behalf of Pew Charitable Trust, Greenpeace and WWF, recognised 
the work of the NC and the joint working group in finding agreement on a harvest strategy for Pacific 
bluefin tuna. This work was vital if the stock was to recover from its current dire state – which was 
currently at just 2.6% of its historic size. The adoption of the harvest strategy was just the first minimum 
step in rebuilding Pacific bluefin. The Commission must ensure that provisions of the Harvest Strategy 
workplan and CMM 2014-06 are fully carried out, especially in respect to catch limits. These 
organisations were strongly concerned that limits have been exceeded in recent years and that there 
were indications that this situation may reoccur this year. These overages threaten the success of the 
40 
rebuilding plan, just as it was in the beginning and given the status of the stock it was vital any catches 
in excess of the quotas be paid back by those States responsible. As a first step, they asked the 
Commission to increase transparency and accountability by clearly publishing the annual quota for 
Pacific bluefin in metric tonnage for each member, either in the Annual meeting report or in the tables 
already provided by the Secretariat. And second, the Commission commit to making progress in 
designing and implementing a robust electronic Catch Documentation Scheme (CDS). 
203. 
The European Union noted that it had been very critical in the past on the way this stock had 
being managed and it was pleased to see there was a significant change in that approach. It was pleased 
the Commission was now moving in the right direction for the recovery of this stock.   
204. 
The NC Vice-Chair also provided an update on the status of the harvest strategy work plan for 
North Pacific albacore.  
“NC13 recommends that the Commission adopt the attached revision to the title of the 
previously adopted Precautionary Management Framework for North Pacific albacore 
(Attachment H), so that it may be recognized as a Harvest Strategy. In addition, NC13 
recommends that the Commission direct the Secretariat to make this harvest strategy available, 
as a stand alone harvest strategy document, on a web page dedicated to this and other harvest 
strategies, including interim harvest strategies, adopted by the Commission.” 
 
205. 
The NC Vice-Chair, in response to a request for clarification about why the limit reference 
point was being titled as interim, confirmed that the limit reference point was established at 20%, so 
was not considered to be interim. However, “interim” as used in this context because it refers to the 
harvest strategy containing management objectives, target reference points and harvest control rules 
elements that are considered at this stage to be “interim”.   
206. 
The Commission adopted the Interim Harvest Strategy for North Pacific Albacore 
Fisheries (NC13 Summary Report, Attachment H, Attachment I), noting that it modifies and 
replaces the previously adopted precautionary management framework for North Pacific 
albacore and is to be recognised as a harvest strategy.   
207. 
The Commission adopted the Harvest Strategy for Pacific Bluefin Tuna Fisheries 
(NC13 Summary Report Attachment F, Attachment J). 
208. 
The Commission tasked the Secretariat to develop a dedicated space on the WCPFC 
website for publishing of harvest strategies, including interim harvest strategies, agreed to by 
the Commission. 
6.9 
Review of Work Plan  
209. 
Australia throughout the WCPFC14 meeting consulted with interested CCMs and developed 
a revised draft of the Harvest Strategy Workplan. Some suggested changes to the workplan for CCMs 
to consider included: 1) extending the current Workplan out to 2021 to allow for the ongoing work 
towards adoption of harvest strategies for the 4 key stocks; 2) reframing the work on bigeye and 
yellowfin tuna given the recent scientific advice for the status of bigeye from rebuilding to developing 
a target reference point; 3) proposing a dedicated discussion in 2018 by SC and the Commission of 
management objectives in terms of candidate target reference points for bigeye and yellowfin. Key 
changes were deferring the 2017 South Pacific albacore TRP decision until 2018 and editing 2017 
items to reflect the actual activities and decisions of the WCPFC14 and its subsidiary bodies during 
2017. 
41 
210. 
The United States supported the changes documented in Rev2 and thanked Australia for 
accommodating its proposed suggestions.  
211. 
Japan pointed out a small correction still to be made in Rev2.  Edits were made on-screen to 
modify the 2019 Workplan to include a review of TRP for skipjack in 2019 as per CMM 2015-06.   
212. 
The Chair, on behalf of the Commission, thanked Australia for their efforts to develop a 
revised Workplan for adoption.  
213. 
The Commission adopted the Updated Workplan for the Adoption of Harvest 
Strategies under CMM 2014-06 (Attachment L). The Secretariat was tasked with including 
text to document progress achieved in 2017 under the WCPFC14 Harvest Strategies agenda 
items. 
214. 
The Commission recognized the importance of developing harvest strategies for key 
stocks in the WCPO. The Commission recognized that this work requires the consideration of 
fisheries managers and scientists at different stages. The Commission notes that the time 
required for harvest strategy discussions is substantial but will also vary from year to year and 
the Commission recognized the need for this to be accommodated.  
215. 
The Commission agreed to reprioritise as needed the annual agenda of the Commission 
and Scientific Committee to allow sufficient additional time for consideration of harvest 
strategy issues. In addition, WCPFC recognised that there may also be a need for a dedicated 
science/management dialogue. 
AGENDA ITEM 7 – WCPO TUNA STOCKS 
7.1 
General overview of stock status (bigeye tuna, Pacific bluefin tuna, skipjack tuna, North 
Pacific albacore, South Pacific albacore, and yellowfin tuna.)  
216. 
The Chair noted that during the Second Intersessional Meeting to Progress the Draft Bridging 
Measure for Tropical Tunas (SS3) held on 1 December 2017, the Commission had received a detailed 
presentation from SPC on the scientific evaluation of the management options requested by the August 
Intersessional meeting held in Hawaii (WCPFC14-2017-10_rev1 ‘An Evaluation of the Management 
options for purse seine and longline fisheries defined by the TT CMM Intersessional meeting - revision 
1)’, as well as a general overview of the status of stocks for bigeye, skipjack and yellowfin. At the one-
day intersessional meeting to progress the draft bridging measure for South Pacific albacore, members 
also received an overview presentation of the stock status of South Pacific albacore from SPC. The 
Commission was also referred to the SC13 Summary Report (WCPFC14-2017-SC13) and 
WCPFC14-2017-IP13 on ‘The western and central Pacific tuna fishery: 2016 Overview and status of 
stocks’ for further information. The Chair proposed that in order to have more time for the substantive 
discussions and because both of the one-day intersessional meetings on the draft Bridging Measure for 
Tropical Tunas and the draft Bridging Measure for South Pacific albacore had just recently met, the 
SPC would not make a presentation on the general stock overview for bigeye, skipjack, South Pacific 
albacore and yellowfin. 
217. 
The ISC Chairman Gerard DiNardo presented an overview of the ISC’s recent stock 
assessments on the North Pacific albacore and North Pacific blue shark. The North Pacific albacore 
stock was likely not overfished and overfishing was likely not occurring. If constant fishing intensity 
was applied to the stock, median female spawning biomass was expected to undergo a moderate decline 
with a <0.01% probability of falling below the WCPFC established LRP by 2025. However, expected 
42 
catches in this scenario would be below the recent average catch level for this stock. North Pacific blue 
shark was not overfished and overfishing was not occurring. Projections under a different fishing 
mortality harvest policy show that median blue shark spawning biomass in the North Pacific Ocean 
would likely remain above SSBMSY in the foreseeable future (2024).  Future activities of ISC include 
a mako shark aging workshop; ISC MSE Albacore workshop; an ad-hoc working group to develop an 
international north Pacific highly migratory species tagging programme with an initial focus on Pacific 
bluefin and North Pacific albacore; ISC initiated Pacific bluefin tuna MSE in 2018 which would 
provide resources, reference points, HCR, and management strategies by 2019. This was a major 
undertaking and agreement from NC13 to move work on Pacific bluefin tuna forward. Stock 
assessments to be finished by July 2018, including an updated Pacific bluefin stock assessment; a north 
Pacific shortfin mako shark stock assessment; and a north Pacific swordfish benchmark stock 
assessment. There would also be a number of additional scientific meetings/ workshops in 2018. He 
further noted the upcoming leadership changes at ISC. John Holmes (Canada) was elected as incumbent 
ISC Chair, and Shui-Kai (Eric) Chang (Chinese Taipei) was elected as ISC Vice-Chair. ISC18 would 
be held in Korea between 11-18 July 2018, and delegates were reminded that requests to ISC needed 
to be made via written letter to the Chair.  
218. 
Canada thanked Gerard DiNardo for the presentation and acknowledged the contribution he 
had made to the Northern Committee and the Commission in general.  In respect of North Pacific 
albacore, it noted the absence of a target reference point, which is a key component of the management 
strategy process, and for this reason Canada hosted a workshop in Vancouver in 2017 and hopes to see 
the adoption of target reference point in 2018.   
7.2 Draft Bridging CMM on Tropical Tunas (bigeye, skipjack, yellowfin)  
219. 
The Chair advised the meeting that the Second Intersessional Meeting to Progress the Draft 
Bridging Measure for Tropical Tunas was held immediately prior to WCPFC14 on Friday 1 December 
2017. The primary document considered at that meeting was Rev5 of the Chair’s Consultative Draft 
on the Tropical Tuna Bridging CMM – Circular 2017/65 WCPFC14-2017-08, and the two 
supplements that were issued containing delegation proposals that had been submitted to WCPFC14 
(WCPFC14-2017-08_suppl1 and WCPFC14-2017-08_suppl2). It was noted that SPC also provided 
a detailed presentation of An Evaluation of the Management options for purse seine and longline 
fisheries defined by the TT CMM Intersessional meeting – revision 1 SPC-OFP WCPFC14-2017-
10_rev1.  Other documents and information papers were taken as read.  
220. 
Since the conclusion of the intersessional meeting, the Chair produced a revised draft bridging 
measure contained at WCPFC14-2017-30 Draft Bridging CMM on Tropical Tunas – Chair’s draft.  
The Chair explained that the draft had been prepared with the assistance of the Secretariat, including 
SPC-OFP, to reflect CCM proposals and feedback over the last seventeen months. It was provided in 
two forms: A clean version (WCPFC14-2017-30), with paragraph numbering largely reflecting Rev5 
text and a tracked version (WCPFC14-2017-30A) showing amendments to the text of Rev5. This draft 
was noted to be a combination of measures that the Chair considered as having the best prospect of 
enabling the Commission to reach consensus. These measures reflect what the Chair considered to be 
a reasonable balance between the varying viewpoints, including on the issue of disproportionate 
burden. The Chair explained that no CCM will see everything it wanted in this draft but believed that 
each CCM would see some of what they wanted, which goes to the heart of the consensus model. The 
Chair then briefly introduced the newly revised text section by section and provided the rationale for 
certain key provisions.   
221. 
Dr John Hampton presented the SPC’s assessment of the impact of the proposed measures 
contained in the Chair’s Draft on a range of key factors, including: maintenance of stock biomass at 
healthy levels; the level of fishing mortality; and the risk of breaching the Limit Reference Point.  An 
43 
updated version of the SPC assessment was subsequently issued on 3 December as WCPFC14-2017-
30B.  The explanatory note that accompanied SPC’s evaluation of the Chair’s Draft stated: 
This draft measure, as evaluated, allows a 9% increase in purse seine associate 
effort and an 11% increase in longline bigeye catch, relative to 2013-2015 baseline 
levels. If implemented over 30 years, adult biomass relative to unfished levels 
(SB/SBF=0) is predicted to decline from 0.32 (recent assessed levels) to 0.29, a 
decline of 10% (relative SB/SBF=0 = 0.9). Fishing mortality is predicted to 
increase by 19% (relative F/Fmsy = 1.19) to just below the Fmsy level (F/Fmsy = 
0.99). The risk of breaching the LRP is greater than 20% (actual approximated 
level = 29%). This risk is conditional on the currently-used uncertainty framework 
as adopted by SC13, i.e. a model ensemble consisting of 72 weighted models 
including both the ‘old’ and ‘new’ growth scenarios. Further work has been 
requested by SC13 which may result in changes to the model ensemble and 
therefore to the uncertainty framework and risks associated with this draft 
measure.     
222. 
The Commission agreed to consider in detail the provisions of the Chair’s Draft in a SWG led 
by the Chair. The Chair continued to update the plenary as negotiations of the Chair’s Draft progressed. 
Some of the sessions of the SWG were held with limited participation to a select number of 
representatives from Members and Participating Territories including for some sessions Heads of 
Delegations only.    
223. 
Pew Charitable Trusts, on behalf of Pew Charitable Trust, Environmental Defense Fund, ISSF, 
Greenpeace, Sustainable Fisheries Partnership and WWF delivered a statement on tropical tunas and 
in response to Chair’s Draft Bridging Measure on Tropical Tunas.  The organisations expressed that 
they were encouraged by the increased spirit of negotiation toward agreement on the tropical tuna 
measure, and the discussions during the intersessional meeting on Friday 1 December that confirmed 
that the current levels of catch and effort in purse seine and longline fisheries are appropriate.  They 
also appreciated the work that was undertaken to provide the new text contained in the Chair’s Draft.  
The organisations pointed out that WCPFC members have agreed to apply the precautionary approach 
and the Commission should not agree to a measure for tropical tunas that does not meet scientific 
advice.  They expressed concern that the current formulation of measures in the Chair’s Draft would 
result in an increase in both purse seine FAD effort and longline bigeye catch.  While there remains 
significant uncertainty with the bigeye stock status, the current best estimates indicate that at these 
levels there is a 29% risk of breaching the limit reference point.  This risk is both higher than the 
Commission agreed risk of breaching the LRP of being at a level of between 0 – 20% and is inconsistent 
with the UN Fish Stock Agreement language that the risk of breaching a limit reference point should 
be very low.  The proposed effort levels in the Chair’s Draft would also not be consistent with scientific 
advice for bigeye.  The organisations further called on WCPFC to further refine this proposed measure 
so that it meets the interim decisions that have already been made and the scientific advice.     
224. 
WWF requested that in the interests of transparency, the NGO community be allowed to attend 
the SWG sessions on tropical tunas, given the expanded representation from Heads of Delegation, only, 
to two per delegation from Members and Participating Territories. 
225. 
The Commission considered this request, but noting that since at least one Member had 
indicated a preference for a HOD-only SWG session, the request from WWF could not be supported.  
An idea was put forth that two persons be allowed to represent all the concerned NGOs 
226. 
Pew Charitable Trusts expressed their concern that the core business of the Commission was 
not going to be conducted in a transparent process and it was unclear what great fears there were from 
having NGOs as part of these processes.  It expressed the view that the Civil Society Organisations 
44 
who contribute significant financial resources to support the work of the Commission were the only 
group that was not being provided an opportunity to participate in the SWG.  It further expressed 
disappointment that the approach of this Commission every time things get hard, was to close down 
transparency.  It strongly encouraged the Commission to consider that a single representative per 
observer delegation is a reasonable level of observer participation.  It further expressed that it was 
unacceptable for the Commission to consider asking observer organisations to choose two 
representatives to represent all observers.  The Commission was asked to further consider these points 
in the spirit of cooperation in which this Commission is meant to function.   
227. 
The Chair provided an update on the SWG sessions and confirmed that the discussions were 
constructive and good progress was made although further work needs to be done.  The Chair suggested 
that the next meeting of the SWG would be an open SWG format to consider the full draft text.   
228. 
The United States noted that there remained some issues that would benefit from a Heads of 
Delegation only discussion before the draft CMM could suitably be considered paragraph by paragraph 
in an open working group session.   
229. 
Australia on behalf of FFA Members, thanked the Chair for her efforts to lead a process that 
would result in a revised measure for tropical tuna. It also thanked all delegations that participated in a 
collegial manner in the same pursuit. FFA Members entered discussions with the intention of retaining 
the full package of 2017 measures. Without rehashing specifics, the three bases for that position were: 
1) that it responded to the scientific advice, which indicated a likelihood that such measures would 
maintain the stock at recent levels but with some risk of declines even below the LRP; 2) that it 
responded to the precautionary approach by waiting until the Commission was confident in the new 
science before removing management measures; and 3) that it responded to the need to avoid 
disproportionate burden on SIDS and Territories. It therefore seemed like a win-win to FFA Members. 
However, they quickly learned that this would not be possible and heard various proposals to relax 
every component of the measure – FAD closures, purse seine effort limits and longline catch limits. 
FFA Members viewed the package of measures that has evolved through the various discussions as a 
reasonable compromise. While not as strong as the 2017 measures, they felt that it did pay adequate 
attention to the three bases outlined above. FFA Members thank all delegations that have been engaged 
in difficult negotiations to arrive at that package. They advised that they were ready to support it. There 
were many other elements in the revised measure that had not been able to get attention, so FFA 
Members suggested that the Commission agree to the main components in principle now so the 
remaining details of the package could be finalised.  
230. 
The Republic of Korea spoke in response to the United States suggestion for a Heads of 
Delegation only discussion on the draft bridging measure.  It indicated a preference to have two 
representatives per Member delegation, or otherwise an open SWG.   
231. 
China expressed to the meeting their feeling that the meeting was very close to consensus.  It 
indicated comfort with either the United States request for a Heads of Delegation only SWG or the 
Koreas alternative of Heads of Delegation + one, with a view to furthering progress on the significant 
matters that remained unresolved.   
232. 
Japan thanked CCMs for their efforts to progress the draft bridging measure thus far. Since the 
Commission adopted CMM 2008-01, Japan has been implementing the tropical tuna measures 
faithfully.  It scrapped 87 longline vessels to comply with catch limits in 2009, and longline catch of 
bigeye tuna has decreased by more than 50% between 2004 and 2016.  The number of FAD sets has 
also been decreased by more than 70% between 2004 and 2016.  Despite these tremendous efforts, 
things are not getting better around Japanese waters.  Catches of skipjack and bigeye have been 
dwindling in the last decade, and this has had serious impacts on Japanese fishermen particularly 
coastal small-scale fishermen.  The situation is particularly bad for skipjack, and migration to the 
45 
western coast of Japan has almost disappeared.  This phenomenon negatively affects not only 
fishermen, but also cultural activities in such a way that traditional festivals to celebrate seasonal 
catches of skipjack are frequently cancelled.  Referring to paragraph 7 of CMM 2015-06, the 
Commission is to consider and pay particular attention to any future recommendations of the Scientific 
Committee relating to the target reference point, including any recommendations with respect to 
potential spatial impacts of fishing on the stock, including possible local depletion or range contraction.  
It noted that it is a fact that catches of skipjack in the area north of 20N have been decreasing, while 
purse seine capacity and the catches of skipjack in the tropical area have been drastically increasing.  
Considering the outcomes from the SC13 meeting for skipjack, Japan expressed its view that there is a 
strong relationship between poor catches of skipjack in its waters and increased catches of skipjack by 
purse seiners in the tropical area.  In respect of bigeye tuna, the scientific advice is very clear.  The 
SC13 advises that the fishing mortality of bigeye tuna should not be increased from current level. Japan 
also noted that additional analysis conducted by SPC demonstrates that strengthening of the current 
measures would be required to keep the probability of breaching Blimit at no less than 20%.   Japan 
also reiterated that the first intersessional meeting in Honolulu agreed that the spawning biomass 
depletion ratio (SB/SBF=0) is to be maintained at or above the average SB/SBF=0 for 2012-2015.   It 
expressed its concern that some members had taken positions during the negotiations that seek to 
weaken the measures, and noted that only Japan had provided proposals to strengthen the measures.  
Finally, Japan reiterated its commitment to continue to participate in the SWG and asked that all CCMs 
continue to participate in the spirit of cooperation.   
233. 
The European Union thanked the Chair for her efforts to progress negotiations towards 
consensus and observed that positions were still divergent. It regretted that discussions were not taken 
in open session so observers could see with their own eyes the discussions on the bridging measure. 
Whilst it preferred to have all discussions in open SWG session, however recognising that this might 
be problematic for some delegations at this point in the discussions, it might be easier to reach 
consensus through further discussions in the closed session as proposed by the United States.  The 
European Union remained committed to working with other delegations towards consensus, noting that 
it would be very regrettable if this meeting was not able to agree to a robust conservation and 
management measure for tropical tunas.   
234. 
The Republic of Marshall Islands, speaking as PNA Chair thanked the Chair for her 
extraordinary efforts and that of the Secretariat staff, to secure a positive outcome at this point in the 
development of a Bridging Measure for Tropical Tunas. PNA Members thanked all the other Members 
that had worked hard in the same direction and the NGOs that contributed. They thanked SPC for their 
very hard work and great skill and also acknowledged the very prominent and positive role played by 
Japan throughout these negotiations working closely with PNA and FFA members. PNA Members 
mentioned they already shared their intention of retaining the full package of 2017 measures based on 
the SPC analysis of options that indicated no room to increase effort for skipjack, and there was no 
room to ease the measures that were in place for bigeye. That conclusion was precisely consistent with 
the advice of the Scientific Committee.  In the spirit of compromise and on the basis that this was a 
bridging measure, PNA Members supported the Chair’s efforts to find an overlap of understanding 
with Members that hold a different view. PNA members took some comfort from the knowledge that 
there would be further work by the Scientific Committee on the bigeye assessment that should reduce 
uncertainty and would probably be more positive. But it might not, and there was no need to rush. The 
tropical tuna management regime that was in place was the most effective in the world. This was the 
only tuna RFMO where all three major tropical tuna stocks were in the green and fished sustainably. 
This was also the only oceanic region where most of the catch in the purse seine fishery was taken on 
free schools not FADs. PNA Members saw no good reason for delegates to leave this meeting without 
some form of arrangement in place to manage the tropical tunas. None felt more deeply about this than 
small island states whose communities were so dependent on these resources and remained committed 
to all efforts to ensure that these stocks are effectively managed and conserved.  
46 
235. 
Papua New Guinea acknowledged that much progress had been achieved with the negotiations 
of the Draft Measures for Tropical Tunas in the closed sessions of the SWG. PNG like other PNA and 
FFA members expected this meeting to successful completion the negotiations of the tropical tuna 
measure which has spanned over the last few years. PNG was of the view that failure to agree on a 
measure would reflect adversely on the integrity of the Commission on the international level. PNG 
came with a great degree of flexibility on certain issues and were ready to compromise on the basis 
that their approach would create mutual benefits. It reminded developed CCMs that it looked forward 
to a revised measure that was accommodative of their shared objectives to enhance development 
priorities. On FAD closure, PNG expressed its concern about the huge disproportional burden it carried 
as a SIDS that was both a flag state and coastal state with the largest population and with an industry 
to protect. At the same time, it was mindful of available scientific advice to conserve the resource for 
future generations. For this reason, it was ready and willing to continue to carry the conservation burden 
of the three months FAD closure in its zone. However, it could not continue with the fourth month 
again and vowed to share this burden with everyone seated here. PNG represented eight million citizens 
and its Pacific brother and sisters. It asked developed powerful nations to take into consideration the 
plight that they put SIDS in when refusing to adopt such measures, such as this draft measure.  PNG 
supported more controls placed on high seas in terms of purse seine effort limits, FAD closures and 
longline limits as this was the Commission’s responsibility. However, at this Commission it was 
disappointing to hear developed nations using the vulnerabilities of their territories to block consensus 
on this issue. These territories could not be compared with SIDS independent sovereign nations. Based 
on the negotiations so far, SIDS were now taking a back seat while developed nations discussed how 
to regulate their waters. This included, refusing to agree on the timeframe for the FAD closure and 
refusing to agree on a limit for longline vessels. PNG acknowledged all the hard work put into 
negotiating this measure and encouraged some CCMs to rethink their positions to arrive at an 
agreement that did not put the reputation and integrity of this Commission into question. It was critical 
to safeguard this vital resource for future generations.  
236. 
The United States expressed concern about the coverage of hard negotiation positions in the 
media which needed to be avoided if consensus was to be reached and it was on that basis that it 
supported a closed session. It explained that data from SPC demonstrated that if the fishery continues 
to fish bigeye tuna the same way as today, then there would not be a problem with the stock. The 
problem, the United States noted, was sending real fisherman that fish today home in order to achieve 
a theoretical longline catch of 18,000MT in the future. Aspirational goals that could not be caught and 
latent effort was being used to constrain stock. The United States mentioned that progress on a bridging 
measure could not be made without resolving these issues. The United States said it put forward 
proposal after proposal that kept getting rejected because some Members wanted to retain their rights 
to catch fish in the future. It was an issue of aspirational rights verses sovereign rights of SIDS and 
fishing nations. The United States reiterated its request to go to a closed SWG session to resolve these 
difficult issues, and suggested that the current direction may lead to a lack of consensus.   
237. 
Japan confirmed that it had intended to keep its comments of a general nature.  However, the 
nature of the United States comment seemed to imply that those flag CCMs who had not met their 
bigeye longline catches in past years were the ones looking to break consensus, and that was 
misleading, particularly to those who were outside the Heads of Delegation meetings.  On the contrary, 
it pointed out that its delegation had been giving concessions for those Members, such as United States 
and China who had exceeded or fully utilised their high seas allocations in recent years.  It noted that 
Japan was a delegation that had put forward proposals during the SWG with a view to accommodating 
those CCMs interests.  It clarified that the outstanding issue in the SWG was high seas FAD closure 
not bigeye longline catch limits.   
238. 
The final plenary consideration of the draft measure for tropical tunas considered four key 
issues as documented in the succeeding paragraphs.  
47 
239. 
The first key issue was the special arrangements contained in the draft measure to 
accommodate the concerns of the United States.  Two specific provisions were negotiated to cater for 
these concerns and the language that was subsequently agreed are contained in paragraph 9 and 
paragraph 29 of CMM 2017-01 that state:  
9. For purposes of paragraphs 39-41 and 45-49, catches and effort of United 
States flagged vessels operating under agreements with its Participating 
Territories shall be attributed to the Participating Territories.  Such agreements 
shall be notified to the Commission in the form of notification under CMM 2016-
05 or its replacement.  Attribution for the purpose of this Measure is without 
prejudice to attribution for the purposes of establishing rights and allocation. 
29. To alleviate the economic hardship of American Samoa particularly its 
canneries, and for the 2018 year only, the United States may transfer 100 vessel 
days from the effort limits established for its EEZ, and notified to the Commission, 
to its high seas effort limit set out in Attachment 1, Table 2.  The United States 
shall notify the Secretariat quarterly of the utilisation of its EEZ limits.  If by 
October 1 2018, the United States has reached its EEZ effort limit, its EEZ effort 
limit will be increased by 100 vessel days, with the expectation that the catch 
taken by United States flagged purse seine vessels and landed in American Samoa 
for the American Samoa canneries is no less than the volume landed in 2017 
increased by 3,500 short tonnes.  The United States shall endeavour to ensure 
that its purse seine vessels do not use any increased high seas effort in the high 
seas west of 180 degrees.  The United States shall provide information to 
WCPFC15 on the implementation of this paragraph.  Upon request this 
arrangement may be re-examined by the Commission at WCPFC15. This 
arrangement shall not constitute a precedent for the future.   
240. 
The United States, in respect of the paragraph 9 of CMM 2017-01, delivered the following 
statement: “As the Commission knows, since 2011 the United States has authorized and reported to the 
Commission the allocation of bigeye longline limits identified under contracts between our three United 
States Participating Territories and eligible permit holders based in Hawaii. These allocations are 
annually reported as United States Participating Territory longline catch and are helping our 
Participating Territories to achieve their aspirational goals for responsible fisheries development. In 
addition, these limited allocations have been approved only after a rigorous public process that includes 
an environmental analysis to ensure consistency with United States law and Commission decisions. 
We understand and appreciate the Commission’s recognition of these agreements in paragraph 9 of 
CMM 2017-01.”   
241. 
The Chair, in respect of paragraph 29 of CMM 2017-01, noted that the formulation of this 
paragraph in the draft measure had occurred during the special Heads of Delegation discussion.  Given 
that the paragraph related to the United States, the Chair asked the United States to explain the proposed 
provision and its intent.   
242. 
The United States expressed its sincere thanks to all the Members who worked with it on 
developing this provision.  It explained that significant consultations had taken place over the course 
of the negotiations, and expressed its hope that the formulation in the draft measure could be agreed at 
this meeting.  American Samoa is a central hub and provides a range of services, including fuel and 
other services, in support of purse seine operations in the Pacific Ocean.  It was noted that there were 
two tuna canneries that had operated in recent times in American Samoa but one had recently closed, 
and the other had needed to take a number of extended closures.  Those closures have taken an 
enormous toll on American Samoa revenues, and past tuna measures have been noted to have been 
hard for maintaining tuna supply to these canneries.  In an effort to assist the people of American 
48 
Samoa, the other members of the Commission were willing to make concessions, and the United States 
expressed appreciation for these efforts.  It explained that the formulation of paragraph 29 in the draft 
measure, sought to allow for some flexibility to allow United States flagged vessels the opportunity to 
utilise a portion of the purse seine EEZ limits within the high seas during 2018, on the proviso that it 
would be offloaded in American Samoa canneries.  The provision was intended to be limited to support 
American Samoa canneries alone, and the United States supported this intent.  It further explained that 
the effect of the provision, is under certain conditions there would be provision to allow the United 
States, for 2018 only, to transfer 100 days from its EEZ limit (totalling 558 days) to the high seas, so 
that overall the impact on stocks would be roughly equivalent.  If by October 2018, the United States 
had fully utilised its EEZ effort limit, then its EEZ limit would be increased by 100 days, with the 
expectation that the equivalent catch would be landed in American Samoa.  The arrangement is a short-
term arrangement, and the United States accepted that this is a one-year provision that expires unless 
the Commission decides otherwise.  It reiterated its appreciation to the Members who had worked to 
finalise the provision, and expressed a hope that the paragraph could be accepted.   
243. 
The Republic of Marshall Islands confirmed its support for the proposed language, noting that 
its support was on the basis that it was for the benefit of the participating territory of American Samoa. 
It also confirmed that the discussions related to this matter, were at times difficult.  In this instance, the 
interests and aspirations of Small Island Developing States in furthering economic opportunities from 
these tuna fisheries were noted to be “the same case”.  The concession provided in the provision is to 
ensure that the landings from the 100 days in question, are made in American Samoa as an offset to the 
hardship that has been faced by American Samoa.   
244. 
The Cook Islands supported this proposal, noting that it was one of the coastal States with 
adjacent EEZ waters to the high seas east of 180W.  It confirmed that the rationale for the proposed 
provision was in their view quite valid.   
245. 
American Samoa, following agreement on paragraph 29 CMM 2017-01, noted that they had 
come to the meeting with an urgent call for help to both Pacific Island countries as well as to distant 
water fishing nations.  On behalf of the Governor and people of American Samoa, it expressed its 
sincere thanks to the Members of the Commission for their display of fellowship by considering the 
needs and concerns of its people.  It expressed special thanks to the FFA and PNA members for their 
support to American Samoa.  It also expressed the view that the support it received during the meeting 
showed that the Commission was being a responsible custodian of the resource and that the participants 
at this meeting were leaving a legacy for the people to come.   
246. 
The second key issue was raised by the Republic of Korea in plenary.  It noted that since the 
introduction of the concept of the PNA longline Vessel Day Scheme, Korea has expressed strong 
concern about the scheme, particularly regarding the impact of the scheme on the management of the 
bigeye stock, with apparent lack of certainties and predictabilities in the output. It noted its strong belief 
that the catch limit, which is currently implemented by the Commission is by far the most effective 
longline bigeye management. No matter how the PNA longline VDS system is referred to, Korea, as a 
Member of the Commission does not recognize the system. Korea has been holding this position for a 
long time and this will not change in the future.  After a lengthy discussion, the following preamble 
paragraph was subsequently agreed in plenary: 
Noting further that the Parties to the Nauru Agreement have adopted and 
implemented a Vessel Day Scheme for the longline fishery, a Vessel Day Scheme 
for the purse seine fishery and a registry for FADs in the zones of the Parties, and 
may establish longline effort limits, or equivalent catch limits for longline 
fisheries within their exclusive economic zones.  
49 
247. 
The third key issue was raised by the Cook Islands in plenary when considering the paragraphs 
relating to the provisions of the measure that would not be applied to Small Island Developing States 
(CMM 2017-01 paragraph 5) and relating to vessels operating under charter arrangements (CMM 2017-
01 paragraph 8).  The Cook Islands noted that it did not have any flagged purse seine vessels, and was 
concerned that the current formulation of these two paragraphs, appeared to prevent the Cook Islands 
from using charter arrangements as a mechanism to continue to develop its purse seine fisheries, 
including in the high seas.  The Cook Islands confirmed that it was unable to go along with consensus 
if this was a correct interpretation of these paragraphs.   
248. 
A lengthy discussion ensued where the Chair and many CCMs strongly encouraged the Cook 
Islands to reconsider its need to accommodate such a substantive issue at such a late stage in the 
negotiation. The Chair reflected that all CCMs had worked very hard at this meeting and many 
compromises were made to ensure that the new measure could be adopted at this meeting and that 
raising a substantive issue like this at such a late stage of the negotiation had the potential to derail the 
final outcome that CCMs had worked so hard to achieve at WCPFC14. 
249. 
The Legal Adviser, in response to a request for interpretation of the current formulation of the 
paragraphs in question, noted that chartering arrangements had been designed to assist countries to 
develop their domestic fleets fishing within their EEZs, with the attribution of catch being to a 
chartering Member.  The issue here was the potential for flag State high seas purse seine limits to be 
circumvented through the attribution of catch of a distant water fishing nation vessel to a SIDS.  The 
Legal Advisor confirmed that the interpretation of the current formulation of the charter attribution 
provisions in the draft measure did mean that even if a SIDS chartered vessels that were flagged to a 
developed CCM, the catch of those vessels would remain subject to the high seas purse seine effort 
limits in the draft measure.   
250. 
The Cook Islands thanked the Legal Advisor for clarifying the interpretation.  It maintained 
that if delegations were not willing to include the necessary modifications to the charter attribution 
paragraphs in the measure to provide an opportunity for all SIDS to charter purse seine vessels to fish 
on the high seas, and to attribute those catches to the chartering SIDS, the only alternative that the Cook 
Islands would be willing to consider would be to declare a purse seine effort limit that would apply to 
the Cook Islands EEZ and high seas waters combined of 1250 days.  Cook Islands reiterated that it was 
seeking a particular decision at this meeting to support the development of its domestic purse seine 
fisheries noting that this was linked to access by vessels fishing in its waters to high seas waters adjacent 
to the Cook Islands EEZ. It assured the Commission that it would only exploit the high seas within its 
combined high seas and EEZ limit, and that it would do so responsibly. 
251. 
Another lengthy discussion ensued which involved a number of CCMs, in an effort to ensure 
a measure could be agreed, discussing a range of drafting formulations that might accommodate a 
specific exemption to address the Cook Islands concern.  The language that was eventually agreed 
became footnote 1 to paragraph 8 of CMM 2017-01, and it states:  
“In 2018, the Cook Islands may charter purse seine vessels to fish on the high seas 
adjacent to the Cook Islands EEZ and the effort of those vessels shall be limited to 100 
vessel days and attributed to the Cook Islands.  WCPFC15 shall consider whether this 
special arrangement will be continued.” 
252. 
The final key issue was that the current CMM expires on the 31 December 2017. The issue 
was that according to Article 20 paragraph 5, it was not possible for the new CMM to enter into effect 
any earlier than 60 days after the end of this Commission meeting, which would be the 6 February 
2018.  This would potentially leave a gap in which no measures for tropical tuna would apply. 
50 
253. 
At the request of the Chair, the Legal Advisor provided advice indicating that there were three 
possible options to address this issue: 1) That the Commission could use the exemption adopted at the 
2012 meeting as a precedent for an exemption to the 60 day rule, noting that the Commission had 
agreed in 2012 that that exemption would not set a precedent for the future; 2) The Commission could 
agree to a Resolution that all CCMs apply the new measure provisionally from 1st January 2018 to 6th 
February 2018. 3) The Commission could agree to extend the application of the expiring measure to 
fill the gap between 1 January 2018 and 6 February 2018.  The Legal Advisor suggested the provisional 
application option as being the most consistent with the Convention and past practice.  
254. 
Following the conclusion of the negotiations of CMM 2017-01, the Commission considered 
the recommendation of the Legal Advisor and agreed to a Resolution that would confirm the decision 
of CCMs to provisionally apply CMM 2017-01 from 1 January 2018 in order to ensure the continuation 
of management measures during early part of 2018.   
255. 
New Zealand proposed, to avoid a similar situation arising following review of CMM 2017-
01, that CMM 2017-01 remains in effect until 10 February 2021 unless otherwise replaced by the 
Commission.   
256. 
The Commission agreed to adopt CMM 2017-01 Conservation and Management 
Measure for Bigeye, Yellowfin and Skipjack tuna (Attachment M).   
257. 
Noting that CMM 2017-01 enters into effect on 6 February 2018, the Commission 
agreed to Resolution 2017-01 Resolution on the Provisional Application of CMM 2017-01 
(Attachment N), for the period from 1 January to 6 February 2018.  
258. 
The Commission agreed that the FAD Management Options IWG would resume its 
work in 2018 and hold a meeting immediately following TCC14.  The FAD Management IWG 
will provide advice to WCPFC15 inter alia on guidelines for the implementation of non-
entangling and/or biodegradable material on FADs; and on whether the number of FADs 
deployed as set out in CMM 2017-01 paragraph 23 is appropriate.   
7.3 
Draft Bridging CMM on South Pacific albacore  
259. 
New Zealand, on behalf of FFA members presented WCPFC14-2017-DP14 Proposal for 
Conservation and Management Measure for the Development of an improved South Pacific albacore 
Measure.  The development of this proposal had considered the discussions during the Intersessional 
Meeting to Progress the FFA Consultative Draft CMM to establish a Limit for South Pacific albacore 
held on 4th October 2017 immediately following TCC13 (WCPFC14-2017-IM-SPA1).  That meeting 
had considered the FFA members WCPFC13 proposal for a consultative CMM that was intended to 
provide a bridge from CMM 2015-02 to the adoption of a more comprehensive proposal.  The 
contributions of the CCMs that had participated in the intersessional meeting were acknowledged as 
having assisted in improving understanding of the views of all the Members, and it was explained that 
the draft CMM proposal had changed considerably as a result.  DP14 proposes a framework to establish 
plans to guide the work of the Commission in developing a comprehensive measure for the 
management of fisheries for South Pacific albacore tuna. This future measure will set agreed limits, 
establish effective fishery monitoring processes, and act to implement the elements of the Harvest 
Strategy relating to this stock and its fisheries.  It was noted that the proposal has taken a revised 
approach and is no longer a bridging measure that sought to replace CMM 2015-02.  Rather the 
proposal seeks to establish the management objectives for the fishery and seeks the Commission’s 
commitment to develop three work plans for improved South Pacific albacore management and to 
support the implementation of the harvest strategy.  New Zealand, on behalf of FFA members, looked 
forward to further discussions on the proposal during the informal SWG during WCPFC14.   
51 
260. 
The Commission agreed that an informal SWG led by New Zealand would be established to 
facilitate further discussion of both South Pacific albacore proposals (DP13 and DP14) during the 
meeting.  
261. 
New Zealand reported on the outcomes from the SWG on south Pacific albacore (WCPFC14-
2017-SWG_SPALB02). The proposal in WCPFC14-2017-DP14 was the basis for discussion in the 
small working group. The proposal developed a lot further over the course of those discussions at 
WCPFC14 and the outcome from the SWG was a proposal to support the development of a roadmap 
to implement elements needed for implementation of the harvest strategy and the effective conservation 
and management of south Pacific albacore.  The SWG agreed that a roadmap for South Pacific albacore 
should be developed over 2018 and submitted to WCPFC15. New Zealand offered to lead this work in 
a virtual intersessional working group and CCMs were invited to inform New Zealand of their 
designated representatives and contact details for this group before the end of the meeting.  
262. 
A number of CCMs thanked New Zealand for leading this work. CCMs supported the 
recommendations and believed that it was important to continue the work on this stock.  The importance 
of the development of a harvest strategy was also recognised, noting that SIDS and Participating 
Territories were extremely concerned about the management of this very important economic resource. 
Many CCMs urged the Commission to give full priority to the development of a harvest strategy for 
South Pacific albacore in 2018 and through the proposed process that full consideration was given to 
the concerns and needs of SIDS and Participating Territories.  
263. 
The outcome for the proposal in DP13 for a target reference point for the South Pacific 
albacore can be found in the decisions under Agenda Item 6.4. 
264. 
The Commission agreed to the formation of a virtual intersessional process to develop 
a Roadmap to implement the elements needed for the effective conservation and management 
for South Pacific albacore.  The roadmap will take into account the outcome of a revised stock 
assessment for South Pacific albacore in 2018 and recommend an overall limit for the fishery, 
how it could be distributed (taking into account the interests of SIDS) and the actions required 
to achieve biological and economic stability in the fishery.  This roadmap will include 
recommendations for a review of the existing CMM for South Pacific albacore.  The terms of 
reference of this intersessional group will be to consider management issues for South Pacific 
albacore including: 
a. The elements necessary for the implementation of a Harvest Strategy approach to the 
management of the stock; 
b. an allocation process; and   
c. monitoring and reporting priorities, and addressing of gaps, for all fisheries taking South 
Pacific albacore within the WCPFC convention area. 
265. 
Also in support of the development of a Roadmap for South Pacific albacore, the 
Commission also agreed to task: 
a. SC14 to provide WCPFC15 with advice on technical aspects of the South Pacific albacore 
harvest strategy including, for example, a consideration of scientific elements of candidate 
harvest control rules, and potential components of the management procedure (e.g. the use of 
CPUE (vulnerable biomass) indices to inform on stock status);  
b. TCC14 to evaluate monitoring and reporting gaps in the South Pacific albacore fishery, as 
well as SIDS and Participating Territories implementation considerations; and  
52 
c. SC14 and TCC14, based on their evaluations, will provide any appropriate advice or 
recommendations to WCPFC15 with respect to informing the development of the Roadmap 
for improving South Pacific albacore management.    
266. 
The Commission accepted New Zealand’s offer to lead this intersessional working 
group, and noted New Zealand’s request that all CCMs with an interest in participating in this 
intersessional working group nominate a point of contact to New Zealand before the 
conclusion of WCPFC14. 
7.4 
CMM 2005-03 on North Pacific albacore  
267. 
The Commission considered the recommendations from NC13 related to the review of CMM 
2005-03 on North Pacific albacore.  It was noted that the Secretariat had provided WCPFC14-2017-
14 (Rev1) Reference Document for Review of CMM 2005-03 and for the Development of Harvest 
Strategies under CMM 2014-06 north Pacific albacore (Thunnus alalunga). 
268. 
The NC Vice-Chair Michael Tosatto (United States) noted that the outcome of discussions at 
SC13 and NC13 indicated that the North Pacific albacore stock was in good condition so there was no 
recommendation for changes to CMM 2005-03. The management strategy evaluation, led by ISC, was 
progressing well. The management objective for the North Pacific albacore fishery was to maintain the 
biomass, with reasonable variability, around its current level in order to allow recent exploitation levels 
to continue and with a low risk of breaching the limit reference point. 
269. 
Ocean Friends Against Driftnets noted that it was a WCPFC observer made up of Pacific 
fisherman, mostly troll fisherman. After the return of the IUU driftnet fleet in the Pacific post-2002, its 
members had been non-productive since 2004. It requested the Commission to rebuild the North Pacific 
albacore stocks to pre-2000 levels.  
7.5 
CMM 2016-04 on Pacific bluefin tuna  
270. 
The Commission considered recommendations from the NC13 related to the review of CMM 
2016-04 on Pacific bluefin tuna.  It was noted that the Secretariat had provided WCPFC14-2017-15 
Reference Document for Review of CMM 2016-04 and for the Development of Harvest Strategies under 
CMM 2014-06 Pacific Bluefin Tuna (Thunnus orientalis). 
271. 
NC Vice-Chair updated the Commission on the review of this CMM and the relevant tasks to 
the NC13 from WCPFC13. The second joint IATTC-WCPFC NC working group meeting on the 
management of PBF was held in Busan, Korea from August 28 – 31, 2017 as an informal meeting. 
NC13 received the report of the Joint Working Group Meeting between NC and IATTC (NC13 
Summary Report, Attachment E). NC13 endorsed the conclusions of the joint working group meeting 
and agreed to incorporate them into relevant recommendations to the Commission.  A proposal to revise 
the CMM on Pacific bluefin tuna was made by NC13 (NC13 Summary Report, Attachment G).   
272. 
The Commission Chair asked if CCMs were prepared to adopt the revised CMM on Pacific 
bluefin tuna as recommended by the Northern Committee.    
273. 
The Chair noted that the Pacific Bluefin harvest strategy for Pacific bluefin tuna fisheries 
would be discussed under Agenda Item 6.8.   
274. 
The Commission agreed to adopt CMM 2017-08 Conservation and Management 
Measure for Pacific Bluefin tuna (Attachment O), which will replace CMM 2016-04 and 
which was prepared to implement the Harvest Strategy for Pacific bluefin tuna fisheries.   
53 
275. 
The Commission noted the proposed workplan to develop a Catch Documentation 
Scheme for Pacific bluefin tuna that is included as an attachment to CMM 2017-08. 
7.6 
Others – North Pacific Striped Marlin 
276. 
The United States noted that despite the Northern Committee not having been charged with 
responsibility for this stock, concerns have been expressed about the status of North Pacific striped 
marlin. In his capacity as NC Vice-Chair, Michael Tosatto (United States), referred the meeting to the 
recommendation in paragraph 91 of the NC13 Summary Report which states “NC13 expressed concern 
over the status of North Pacific striped marlin and urged the Commission to develop a rebuilding plan 
for the stock as a matter of priority. NC members are encouraged to submit a draft CMM, if possible.”  
The United States reiterated that the status of the North Pacific striped marlin remains a concern for 
the United States and for the Northern Committee, and the Commission should develop a rebuilding 
plan for this stock as a matter of priority.   
277. 
The Chair sought the views of CCMs to address the status of this stock, as recommended by 
NC13.  
278. 
The European Union shared the concern for the status of North Pacific striped marlin and 
agreed that this was a matter of priority for the Commission.  It urged that based on the stock status the 
Commission must take concerted action to towards ensuring that adequate measures are taken next 
year.   
279. 
The United States clarified that owing to the North Pacific striped marlin stock not yet being 
designated as a northern stock by this Commission, the NC felt it was constrained in being able to 
submit a draft CMM as a recommendation to the Commission.  It would be preferable for the 
Commission to first resolve the question of whether the North Pacific striped marlin and the North 
Pacific blue shark were northern stocks, so the Northern Committee could be clearer as to its 
management responsibility in respect of those stocks.   
280. 
The Chair emphasised the point was that the North Pacific striped marlin is overfished and 
urged the Commission to take the necessary steps to address this.   
281. 
Some CCMs expressed a preference that because the North Pacific striped marlin was not 
designated as a Northern stock, that the SC alone should be tasked to provide advice and 
recommendations to the Commission next year.  Other CCMs expressed a preference that the 
Commission task SC to consider available information and to recommend whether this stock should be 
designated as a northern stock.   
282. 
Japan had suggested as a way forward, that there might be a conditional recommendation based 
on outcome of SC14 on the question of designating North Pacific striped marlin as a northern stock: so 
if SC recommends it as a northern stock, then the Commission could task NC to manage this stock and 
provide a recommendation to the Commission; however if SC recommended that it was not a northern 
stock, then SC would be requested to make a recommendation to the Commission.   
283. 
During the course of the discussions it was clarified that scientific information and stock 
assessments for North Pacific striped marlin had been provided by ISC in the past, and North Pacific 
striped marlin was traditionally covered in the ISC work program.  The ISC will conduct another North 
Pacific striped marlin assessment in 2019 and since SPC is a standing member of the ISC Billfish 
Working Group (BILLWG), there was a mechanism to involve them in the upcoming stock assessment.   
54 
284. 
Some CCMs expressed that because North Pacific striped marlin has been recognised to be 
overfished and overfishing occurring for some years, it wasn’t appropriate for the Commission to wait 
for an updated stock assessment due in 2019 before developing a CMM and rebuilding proposal.   
285. 
As a way forward, the Chair requested that the Secretariat provide some background on past 
SC discussions on North Pacific striped marlin.   
286. 
The Science Manager Dr SungKwon Soh confirmed that North Pacific striped marlin 
designation as a northern stock was first discussed at SC in 2007-2008. The NC had at that time 
requested that the Commission designate North Pacific striped marlin as a northern stock. As requested 
by the NC, the ISC provided the results of an analysis to SC4 that estimated the majority (65–70%) of 
the biomass of the North Pacific striped marlin to occur north of 20°N latitude. However, SC4 noted 
that the information presented was not sufficient to demonstrate that North Pacific striped marlin be 
classified as a northern stock. The Commission noted that there has not yet been a recommendation by 
the SC that northern striped marlin is a northern stock.  The ISC Chair was asked to elaborate on the 
information that was submitted to support SCs consideration of whether it should be designated as a 
northern stock.   
287. 
The ISC Chair noted that ISC did provide the necessary information at SC4 to render a 
designation determination. Previous information included both genetic and catch data, which clearly 
indicated that it was a northern stock.  The ISC chair confirmed that he was not certain that there would 
be any new information available in 2018 to inform a decision of a designation of North Pacific striped 
marlin as a northern stock.  Irrespective of the question of designation as a northern stock, he further 
urged that NP striped marlin has been considered to be in an overfished state for a number of years and 
no action has been taken by the Commission in response.  
288. 
Many CCMs confirmed that whether North Pacific striped marlin was a northern stock or not 
was not the problem.  It was acknowledged that the best available information is that North Pacific 
striped marlin is in an overfished condition therefore urgent action was needed to rebuild the stock.  
These CCMs expressed support for the SC being tasked to provide recommendations.  It was also 
acknowledged that any management measures can be reviewed if any new information came out of a 
new stock assessment in the future.   
289. 
Japan cautioned that SC11 had already made a recommendation to the Commission, which 
was that the Commission develop a rebuilding plan for the NP striped marlin in order to improve stock 
status. 
290. 
The Chair in summarising the discussions confirmed that ultimately this matter would mean 
this issue is revisited at WCPFC15 following advice from SC14. The eventual outcome of this agenda 
item including tasking to SC14, is recorded under Agenda Item 9.2 NC13 Summary Report.   
AGENDA ITEM 8 – BYCATCH MITIGATION  
8.1 
Sharks (CMMs: 2010-07; 2011-04; 2012-04; 2013-08; 2014-05) 
291. 
The European Union introduced WCPFC14-2017-DP01 Proposal for a Conservation and 
Management Measure for Sharks caught in association with fisheries managed by WCPFC, which 
aimed to change fishing, storing and processing practices on-board vessels that implement the finning 
ban through the application of the 5% fins to carcass weight ratio. It proposed that CCMs shall prohibit 
the removal of shark fins at sea and the retention on board, transhipment and landing of shark fins. 
292. 
Japan thanked the European Union for tabling this proposal. The position of Japan on this 
issue was well known so it would not repeat it. Japan was not in a position to support this proposal but 
55 
it would like to discuss this issue in the context of the comprehensive shark conservation measure at 
this Meeting.  
293. 
 China thanked the European Union and noted that it had a similar position to Japan. It could 
not support this proposal.  
294. 
The United States thanked the European Union. It believed this was a significant issue that 
needed to be addressed if the Commission was committed to taking a more comprehensive approach 
to shark conservation and time should be taken to see if CMMs could reach agreement on this issue. It 
supported this measure being explored in the discussions of the broader comprehensive measure.  
295. 
Kiribati noted that its position was similar to Japan and others. It had concerns on some of the 
elements proposed and it believed the proposal would burden its artisanal fisherman and would hurt 
subsistence fishers that rely on utilising as much of their catch as possible. Kiribati said the measure 
should focus on commercial fishermen that catch more sharks.  
296. 
Australia thanked the European Union for progressing this initiative. It was entirely consistent 
with Australian domestic law and Australia was comfortable with supporting the proposal.   
297. 
The European Union thanked the United States and others for their strong support of this 
measure. TCC had been saying for a number of years that the 5% ratio was not an appropriate means 
to ensure the recommendations were implemented. It understood that some Members still had 
hesitations and it hoped that the Commission could move forward and more members moved towards 
the fins “naturally attached proposal”. In response to Kiribati’s proposed exemption, the European 
Union was not willing to introduce any exemptions to its fins naturally attached proposal. The only 
way to make sure no finning was occurring was to have an “all fins naturally attached” policy.  
298. 
Papua New Guinea noted the European Union proposal but emphasised the need to recognise 
artisanal fishing. It supported the position of Kiribati. It noted the proposal to remove paragraph 11 of 
CMM 2010-07 which provides for alternative measures in national waters. As Papua New Guinea said 
last year, paragraph 11 was important and it had to be retained. 
299. 
Palau noted the European Union proposal that was presented last year, which led to a decision 
on a more comprehensive approach. FFA Members noted SC13 recommended two options for the 
development of a comprehensive shark and ray measure for WCPFC15 adoption, and FFA Members 
lent their support to the option to collate existing measures. They also noted the TCC13 
recommendation requesting the Secretariat to develop terms of reference to guide the work of an 
intersessional drafting group in 2018. Several FFA members were interested in participating in a 
drafting group. The Chair noted that this discussion would come up under agenda item 8.1.1.  
300. 
Indonesia thanked the European Union. It understood a lot of effort was put into this work. It 
found that it was quite common to have difficulties collecting data on bycatch though Indonesia tried 
hard to meet the CMM requirements. Regarding the text in paragraph 7 “shall report catch of each 
species”, its understanding was that this information would be reported to the Commission. Indonesia 
could agree to that sentence. It sought clarification if that was all catch species or was it just the species 
referred to in the measures.   
301. 
FSM thanked the European Union. It supported the interventions of Kiribati, Palau, and Papua 
New Guinea. The distinction between the high seas and the fisheries of EEZs and the impact on 
subsistence fisheries was important. FSM supported the views of Palau and language more explicitly 
applied to the high seas and the EEZs. For FSM, the CMM was more of a minimum standard compared 
with its own domestic laws. It would like to see more language on EEZs taking into account cultural 
differences, but could agree in principal to the approach proposed by the European Union to protect 
marine species.  
56 
302. 
Samoa supported the proposal but it also needed to consider its small fleet. There must be a 
consideration for exceptions and that had to be seriously considered for Samoa’s small fleets.  
303. 
The Chair summarised that despite clear expressions of interest to explore how the 
Commission could strengthen its shark conservation measures, there was no consensus on the European 
Union proposal at this time. This discussion could continue under agenda item 8.1.1 below.  
8.1.1 
Comprehensive approach to shark and ray conservation and management 
304. 
Dr Shelly Clarke (WCPFC Secretariat/ ABNJ Common Oceans Project) presented 
WCPFC14-2017-17 Development of a Comprehensive Shark CMM for the WCPFC. It updated 
WCPFC14 on discussions held by SC13 and TCC13 in the context of work towards the development 
of a comprehensive shark and ray conservation and management measure (CMM) which would unify 
the five existing shark and ray measures. The paper also responded to TCC13’s request for the 
Secretariat to prepare draft terms of reference for a possible intersessional drafting group to be 
established by WCPFC14 that could draft a measure for consideration at the next Commission meeting. 
CMMs were asked to consider what type of intersessional working group they wanted to form, such as 
an ad hoc group, an intersessional working group, a drafting group or a virtual group, whether any 
chairs or vice-chairs needed to be elected. This meeting needed to agree to terms of reference which 
included a scope of work to draft a measure to bring to WCPFC15.  
305. 
The Chair asked for CCMs views on developing the intersessional process to bring a draft 
measure to WCPFC15 for consideration. An informal SWG at this meeting would develop the terms 
of reference for the Shark-IWG.   
306. 
The European Union thanked Dr Clarke on her excellent work to guide this discussion. It 
considered this approach as a valid way forward as it was done for shark measures in other RFMOs. 
Aligning this Commission’s existing measures involved both simple consolidation drafting and more 
complex amalgamations given the various reporting requirements. The time at this meeting was not 
sufficient to finish this work properly, so the European Union would support the establishment of an 
intersessional group. The European Union would be happy to lead, but was also happy to be an active 
participant.   
307. 
China supported the continued progress of this comprehensive approach and the establishment 
of the intersessional group. It suggested Japan could chair the informal SWG at this meeting.  
308. 
The United States believed it was important to have a comprehensive approach that would 
take a full look at the existing measures and develop a way forward. It supported the intersessional 
working group, though did not have a view on who should lead the discussion of the SWG.  
309. 
Tuvalu noted that it was always a concern to those members with very small administrations 
when the Commission was considering establishing more intersessional working groups. It asked for 
this group to be managed virtually rather than organising more physical meetings.  
310. 
Japan also thanked Dr Clarke for her hard work and efforts to progress this comprehensive 
measure. It had one question regarding the possible terms of reference, specifically the task of providing 
a framework for development and adoption of new components in 6.2 paragraph 4. When new measures 
were developed, the proposal would be sent to the Commission to amend the CMM. Japan sought 
clarification on this text. It supported an electronic / virtual intersessional group and thanked China for 
nominating Japan to chair the informal SWG. It was happy to assume this role.  
311. 
The Chair responded that this paragraph came straight from a decision taken by the Nadi 
meeting last year, to ensure the proposal remained flexible to reflect the data available. How that was 
57 
implemented would be up to the terms of reference and any draft that would be developed from these 
terms of references.  
312. 
Australia supported the establishment of a virtual intersessional working group. This was an 
important issue and Australia was keen to play a constructive role.  
313. 
Canada echoed the comments of support to advance this issue. It was quite a complex 
assortment of measures and there were differing measures on how they were applied domestically. It 
appreciated the leadership demonstrated by Dr Clarke and interested CCMs.   
314. 
The Chair summarised that there was broad support for the intersessional process to continue 
progress on this comprehensive measure. An informal SWG (led by Japan) was established at this 
meeting to develop terms of reference for the Sharks-IWG as well as to confirm chairs and/or co-chairs.  
315. 
Japan reported back on the progress of the SWG and thanked Dr Clarke for her help drafting 
the document and providing advice. Terms of reference was produced and CCMs agreed that the IWG 
would develop a draft comprehensive measure which would then be submitted to WCPFC15 for 
consideration and adoption. Some members were concerned with budgetary implications of 
establishing another IWG so it was agreed that this group would conduct its work electronically and 
that Japan would serve as Chair. All CCMs and observers were invited to participate. A draft would be 
submitted in February next year and one month would be given for comments on content or new ideas 
and additional provisions. Feedback deadline would be the end of March 2018. This next draft version 
with comments incorporated would be tested with Dr Clarke and various other technical experts and 
would be finished sometime between April and SC14 and TCC14. The SWG was mindful that WCPFC 
had a process underway to identify or define all shark species. The SWG did not have enough time to 
discuss the development of safe release guidelines but it did identify three possible options: 1) develop 
for specific shark species; 2) develop for all shark species; 3) do not develop at all as some guidance 
already existed on website. 
316. 
The European Union thanked Japan for their effective Chairing of the SWG and again thanked 
Dr Clarke for her support. It was pleased with the outcome of the SWG. There was much work ahead 
and this would rely on the guidance of the IWG Chair. The European Union supported Japan’s 
continuous Chairing through this process and also hoped that Dr Clarke would be able to continue 
supporting this work despite moving into her new role as she was essential to the success of this work. 
On the issue of the safe release guidelines, SC14 should simply be tasked to develop a set of guidelines 
for silky and whitetip sharks that should take into account existing guidelines adopted in other fora.  
317. 
The Chair thanked the European Union and noted they proposed WCPFC14 task SC14 to 
develop and propose a set of guidelines for silky and whitetip sharks for consideration and adoption at 
WCPFC15.  
318. 
The United States remarked that the IWG should discuss and determine whether to develop 
safe release guidelines for some or all species, not the SC.   
319. 
Canada supported progressing this work noting its importance was why Canada supported the 
IWG at TCC13. A process issue came to mind while its two delegates at this meeting tried to cover as 
many issues as possible. Canada asked if there was a clearer more simple way to find documents during 
meetings so that delegates did not need to search several pages to find where documents were placed, 
either on the secure website or the public website in multiple windows. The Secretariat noted that it 
was doing its best to manage the documents for this meeting. The document was posted on the public 
website site as the local meeting server is accessible only from within plenary room when the WCPFC 
meeting is in session (the meeting room and the meeting server network are shutdown overnight). It 
was happy to provide guidance on where to find documents.  
58 
320. 
The European Union responded to United States comments on the safe release guidelines. It 
did not want any process delay on developing guidelines. The SWG already agreed to develop 
guidelines for all sharks and there was a recommendation to develop guidelines for these two specific 
species. There was also a retention ban for these specific species. The current wording did not preclude 
the development of guidelines for other species.  
321. 
Japan responded to the United States and European Union comments. It supported the 
European Union’s view, that from looking at paragraph five of the terms of reference it reads as though 
safe release guidelines could be considered for inclusion in the new CMM. If that happened, there 
would be some difficulty in managing the process due to the size of the workload. Hopefully safe 
release guidelines for silky and whitetip shark could at least be developed and if SC could do that it 
would reduce some of Japan’s workload.  
322. 
The European Union drew attention back to reference paper WCPFC14-2017-16 Reference 
Document for Bycatch Mitigation CMM Reviews. Point 5 in the paper reads: “SC13 adopted the Report 
of ISG-5 on the safe release guidelines for manta and mobulid rays (see Attachment 1)”. These 
guidelines had not yet been adopted at the level of the Commission, it had only endorsed what the SC 
has said, so the Commission needed to agree to adopt these guidelines. Regarding Point 6 in the paper: 
“SC13 recommends TCC13 and WCPFC14 note that SC has not yet adopted Guidelines for safe release 
for silky and oceanic whitetip sharks”. The European Union proposed the Commission task SC14 and 
TCC14 to develop these guidelines.  
323. 
The Chair clarified that when the Commission adopted the reports of TCC13 and SC13, the 
recommendations in those reports were also adopted. CCMs could comment on the individual 
recommendations or issues when those reports were being considered, but they would not be considered 
one by one. On the issue of safe release guidelines for silky and oceanic whitetip sharks, the Chair 
suggested that the Commission could agree to discuss in future work on the comprehensive 
management measure for sharks and rays. The European Union agreed with this approach.  
324. 
The United States supported the European Union’s proposal for the Commission to adopt the 
safe release guidelines for manta and mobulid rays.  
325. 
Chinese Taipei sought clarification on whether the safe release guidelines for manta and 
mobulid rays were voluntary or mandatory. If voluntary it could support adoption at this meeting.  
326. 
FSM clarified that SC had been asked to develop species specific guidelines for silky and 
white tip sharks. It preferred general guidelines for safe release for all sharks in general, not species 
specific.  
327. 
The European Union responded that the specific guidelines proposal arose because there was 
a retention ban already in place for those species, but safe release guidelines for all sharks could be 
explored as a mandatory measure as part of the work on the comprehensive measure. If they were not 
mandatory then they might not be used.  
328. 
Japan supported FSM’s views on the development of safe release guidelines for all shark 
species. The Commission should instruct SC14 to advise whether they should be voluntary or 
mandatory on species by species basis, which would account for biological differences.   
329. 
SPREP noted in recent years it had taken an active interest in the proceedings of this 
Commission, particularly in the areas of bycatch of threatened species and marine debris. SPREP had 
promoted these issues in a number of international fora, including the Convention on Migratory 
Species, the Convention for International Trade in Endangered Species and at the United Nations Ocean 
Conference earlier this year. It therefore warmly welcomed this agenda item on the mitigation of 
bycatch and congratulated the Secretariat on the constructive work that has been carried out in recent 
59 
years, especially through the ABNJ project. It was particularly grateful for the turtle by-catch mitigation 
workshops convened through this project in 2016. With the financial support of the European Union, 
SPREP would be implementing a project on bycatch mitigation in commercial and artisanal fisheries 
in the Pacific islands region over the next four years. While the main focus of the programme would 
be on the mitigation of turtle bycatch, it also intended to support investigations of the bycatch of marine 
mammals, sharks and rays and seabirds, as resources permit. SPREP was very encouraged by the 
positive attitude adopted by Members in the debate. SPREP welcomed opportunities for collaborations 
with all stakeholders to support the Commission’s work to mitigate the bycatch of threatened marine 
vertebrate species. It welcomed discussions in the margins of this meeting on possible opportunities 
for collaborations with potential partners, including national delegations, IGOs, industry and NGOs. 
330. 
The Commission adopted as Guidelines the Best Handling practices for the safe release 
of manta and mobulids (as referenced in SC13 draft Summary Report, Attachment H, 
Attachment P).  
331. 
The Commission agreed to task SC14 to develop proposed guidelines for safe release 
of rays and sharks and taking into account existing standards or guidelines adopted on other 
fora.  The Commission agreed that priority should be given to the development of guidelines 
for safe release of silky shark and oceanic whitetip sharks. 
332. 
The Commission agreed to form an intersessional working group to develop a draft 
comprehensive shark CMM for discussion at WCPFC15 (IWG-Sharks).  The IWG-Sharks will 
primarily work virtually and will be formed through the issuance of a Circular from the 
WCPFC Secretariat inviting all parties to nominate representatives to participate in the 
activities of the group.  The IWG-Sharks will be chaired by Japan.  Terms of reference for the 
IWG-Sharks are attached at Attachment Q.   
333. 
WCPFC14 agreed that the first phase of work will begin with the IWG Chair codifying 
WCPFC’s existing shark measures, taking into account comprehensiveness, and distributing 
this draft to participants by the end of February 2018.  The IWG Chair will request that 
comments on the codified draft, as well as contributions on new elements, from IWG-Sharks 
participants be received by the end of March 2018.  The IWG Chair will then compile these 
comments on the codified draft and new elements into a revised draft, requesting technical 
advice as necessary, and circulate it to IWG-Sharks participants on a timeline to be determined 
by the IWG Chair, giving due consideration to the timelines for SC14 and TCC14.    
8.2 
CMM 2015-03 on Seabirds 
334. 
New Zealand presented WCPFC14-2017-DP05 Proposed changes to CMM 2015-03 in 
regards the seabird mitigation requirements (Rev 1). The purpose of this amendment was in response 
to the decline in seabird numbers, especially albatross. There was a need to address this by optimising 
the mitigation required by the fishing industry while also ensuring that mitigation devices were 
effective at mitigating bycatch. The paper contained two proposals: i) changing tori line requirements 
for small vessels; ii) the addition of hook shielding devices as one alternative equipment option that 
could be used instead of line weighting and tori lines. The proposed amendments reflect a 
recommendation from SC12 on tori lines. There was also a proposed revision to paragraph 9 to make 
reporting requirements clearer.   
335. 
The Chair asked if CCMs still wished to discuss this in a SWG at this meeting.  
60 
336. 
Australia was concerned with fishing interactions with seabirds and felt that the problem 
needed to be addressed. The seabird measure should be discussed in a SWG – these were not scientific 
issues and should be fully considered at this meeting. 
337. 
The United States believed that periodic review of CMMs on bycatch was important. It 
supported New Zealand’s work and supported SWG discussions at this meeting.  
338. 
Japan thanked New Zealand for preparing this proposal. Japan was pleased that its fishers 
could have more equipment options to mitigate seabird bycatch, but were aligned with China. A 
scientific recommendation from the SC was needed before alternative devise options could be adopted. 
Particularly, SC recommendation was needed to introduce hook shielding devise as equivalent measure 
to the combination of night setting, tori line and weighted branch lines.  Also, the fishing method was 
different in Japan and hook shielding device would not work. The reporting requirement amendment 
seemed acceptable with minor edits. These could be discussed in SWG if established. 
339. 
The European Union expressed support for this proposal. It hoped concerns could be addressed 
in the SWG. 
340. 
Samoa supported the measure. In Samoan culture they are called storm birds, rather than 
seabirds.  They were very important part of Samoan life. Samoa would also like to have timelines given 
to the consideration of these issues at this meeting, as there were quite a number of issues given to 
small working groups for consideration at this meeting as they have to be brought back to plenary for 
finalisation. 
341. 
China thanked New Zealand for its proposal. It was encouraged by technical developments so 
that new devices could be used. As it was a technical development it should be reviewed by the SC as 
the proposal only demonstrated that one CMM had good results from these new devices. It had no 
objection to continuing discussions in a SWG.   
342. 
Chinese Taipei also had some concerns, including revision of current the measure. The hook 
shielding device would need some more costing information for fishermen of small scale fishing 
vessels. It supported the establishment of the SWG.  
343. 
A SWG led by New Zealand considered the proposal in greater detail. New Zealand regularly 
updated the Commission of the progress and final outcomes of the SWG. 
344. 
Australia thanked New Zealand for its proposal and continued efforts to lead strengthening of 
measures to reduce bycatch of seabirds in WCPFC fisheries. Australia welcomed the adoption of 
revisions to tori line requirements and the amendments to data reporting, noting the importance of both 
providing flexibility for small vessels and improving data collection on seabird bycatch. Australia noted 
the extensive evidence of the effectiveness of hook shielding devices for minimising seabird bycatch 
and did expect that the Commission would be able to agree to the use of these as an optional mitigation 
device this year, however it supported the recommendation that SC14 review this information with a 
view to agreeing to the use of these devices next year. 
345. 
While the United States was disappointed to see hook shielding devices removed from the 
measure as a formally recognised mitigation device, it was comfortable with the way forward.   
346. 
The Commission agreed to adopt CMM 2017-06 Conservation and Management 
Measure for Mitigating Impacts of Fishing on Seabirds (Attachment R), which will replace 
CMM 2015-03.   
61 
347. 
The Commission tasks SC14 and TCC14 to review the available research on hook 
shielding devices and advise WCPFC15 if they are effective options for seabird bycatch 
mitigation in WCPFC fisheries and whether to incorporate them in the seabird CMM as 
additional mitigation options.  
8.3 
CMM 2008-03 on Sea Turtles 
348. 
The United States introduced WCPFC14-2017-DP20_Rev1 Potential Revisions to CMM 
2008-03, Conservation and Management Measure of Sea Turtles (Rev1), which suggested the SC and 
TCC be tasked to provide recommendations to the Commission on several specific matters as follows: 
The proposal was for the Commission to task SC14 and TCC14 to evaluate the expected effects of 
several potential sea turtle management scenarios, including ones in which vessels in all longline 
fisheries in the Convention Area are required to: i) use either large circle hooks or whole finfish for 
bait; (2ii) use large circle hooks and whole finfish for bait; or iii) use any other combination of 
mitigation methods identified by the SC as being potentially effective. SC’s evaluation should focus 
on expected effects on sea turtle interactions and mortalities and on target species catch rates. TCC’s 
evaluation should focus on implementation and compliance implications. A large circle hook should 
be considered as having a minimum width of at least 4.4 centimetres. Based on the evaluations, SC14 
and TCC14 will provide any appropriate advice or recommendations to WCPFC15 with respect to 
improving CMM 2008-03. 
349. 
The United States also introduced WCPFC14-2017-DP21_Rev1 Potential revisions to ROP 
minimum data– standards - in respect of sea turtles (Rev 1). In 2016, the WCPFC convened two 
workshops that were funded by the ABNJ (Common Oceans) Tuna project to analyse the effectiveness 
of sea turtle mitigation in Pacific longline fisheries with respect to rates of interaction and mortality. 
The second workshop included recommendations on data collection by fishery observers. The 
participants of the workshop agreed that one of the best approaches to obtaining high quality data for 
similar analyses in the future was to ensure that data collection protocols for turtle interactions with 
fisheries, and those describing the associated fishing effort, were standardised. The workshop 
recommended specific updates to the WCPFC Regional Observer Programme (ROP) Minimum 
Standard Data Fields. The United States agreed that improved data collection on sea turtle interactions 
would be useful for the Commission’s work. It suggested that the Commission direct the SC, TCC, and 
the Secretariat to consider the workshop’s recommendations and recommend appropriate modifications 
to the ROP Minimum Standard Data Fields. The United States proposed draft decision text and 
welcomed proposed edits. The United States noted that early comments from CCMs had already been 
incorporated in Rev1 versions of each paper 
350. 
Tonga on behalf of FFA Members thanked the United States for their discussion papers. FFA 
Members lent their support to the recommendations contained in both DP20 and DP21, noting the clear 
proposals of future work for the SC and TCC. 
351. 
Japan thanked the United States for this proposal and for the opportunity to provide early 
feedback. Japan’s comment on needing to evaluate the effectiveness of mitigation measures had been 
incorporated. This Commission should also discuss catch rates of bycatch species, just like 
International Commission for Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT). Some mitigation techniques 
might increase catch rates of sharks, so that they should also be considered and reflected. 
352. 
The European Union thanked the United States for its papers and for the recommendations. It 
had one comment that was already incorporated into Rev1, so it could support the proposal. It had one 
other question regarding the extensive discussion at SC13 this year that was not resolved, which related 
to concerns about the impacts on other bycatch and target species. Was the United States going to 
submit new papers to progress this issue? Did it need more elements or new data for the next SC 
meeting? etc. The United States responded that when SC13 discussed this issue they discussed 
62 
recommendations from the ABNJ workshop, what they would like to look at next year would be their 
evaluation of their mitigation measures.  
353. 
China thanked the United States for the recommendations. China could support them. There 
was one minor issue with minimum hook size of 4.4 cm. Since it was the Commission’s decision to 
ask the SC for advice, China wanted to avoid asking the SC about size for now and remain focused on 
minimum hook standards. The United States responded that the hook size was a recommendation from 
the ABNJ turtle mitigation workshop 
354. 
FSM on behalf of PNA Members thanked the United States for following up on the workshops 
on sea turtle mitigation in longline fisheries. They supported in principle the United States proposal to 
refer the recommendations of the workshops on data collection by observers to the SC. PNA Members 
would like to task the SC to consider also the alternative of having some of this data provided by the 
vessel operators, especially data on fishing gear. They noted that longline observer coverage was very 
low and highly unrepresentative, and observer workloads were growing. PNA Members thought it 
made sense for the SC to look at the option of some of this data being provided by vessel operators. It 
provided a small text revision to the United States to reflect this option.  
355. 
Japan supported FSM’s comments and noted that the work load of observers should also be 
considered.  
356. 
Chinese Taipei supported the proposal from United States but had some concerns and would 
like to have a discussion in the SWG. The Commission Chair responded that a SWG would not be 
established to further discuss the draft recommendations in these papers. The Commission was just 
testing support for the recommendations as they were currently drafted.   
357. 
The United States continued to work in the margins with interested delegations to further 
revise the recommendations. It tabled new recommendations in the new revisions of each paper as 
follow: 
• 
WCPFC14-2017-DP20_Rev3 proposed:  
The Commission tasks SC14 and TCC14 to evaluate the expected effects of several potential sea 
turtle management scenarios, including, but not limited to, ones in which vessels in all longline 
fisheries in the Convention Area are required to: (1) use either large circle hooks or whole 
finfish for bait; (2) use large circle hooks and whole finfish for bait; or (3) use any other 
combination of mitigation methods identified by the SC as being potentially effective. The SC 
may consider a range of large circle hook specifications. SC’s evaluation should focus on 
expected effects on sea turtle interactions and mortalities and on target and bycatch species 
catch rates. A large circle hook should be considered as having a minimum width of at least 4.4 
centimeters. TCC’s evaluation should focus on implementation and compliance implications, 
as well as SIDS implementation considerations. Based on the evaluations, SC14 and TCC14 
will provide any appropriate advice or recommendations to WCPFC15 with respect to 
improving CMM 2008-03. 
 
• 
WCPFC14-2017-DP21_Rev2 proposed:  
WCPFC14 tasks SC14 to consider the recommendations of the recent Joint Analysis of Sea 
Turtle Mitigation Effectiveness workshops to modify the ROP Minimum Standard Data Fields 
with respect to improving the collection of data related to sea turtle interactions, taking into 
account capacity of observers and priority of data collection, and to recommend any 
modifications for the consideration of the ROP Coordinator, TCC14 and WCPFC15. SC may 
also consider possible modifications to operational level data requirements.  
63 
 
358. 
The European Union questioned whether the tasking may also consider a range of circle hooks 
and large range of circle hooks, or large hooks in general. United States clarified it would look at a 
large range of circle hooks. The European Union sought further clarification on why just large circle 
hooks and not a range of specifications or large circle hooks. Just stating hooks did not preclude the 
specific hooks the United States had already mentioned and could allow for a broader range.  
359. 
Samoa supported the proposal but sought clarification on minimum size of the hook. Had it 
been considered as it thought it was still too big.  
360. 
The United States further noted the existing measures contained a reference to large circle 
hooks and as this tasking was seeking better clarity, that was why the provided text included a range.   
361. 
The Chair thanked the United States for progressing this work.  
362. 
The Commission tasks SC14 and TCC14 to evaluate the expected effects of several 
potential sea turtle management scenarios, including, but not limited to, ones in which vessels 
in all longline fisheries in the Convention Area are required to: (1) use either large circle hooks 
or whole finfish for bait; (2) use large circle hooks and whole finfish for bait; or (3) use any 
other combination of mitigation methods identified by the SC as being potentially effective. 
The SC may consider a range of specifications for large circle hooks.  SC’s evaluation should 
focus on expected effects on sea turtle interactions and mortalities and on target and bycatch 
species catch rates. TCC’s evaluation should focus on implementation and compliance 
implications, as well as SIDS implementation considerations. Based on the evaluations, SC14 
and TCC14 will provide any appropriate advice or recommendations to WCPFC15 with 
respect to improving CMM 2008-03. 
363. 
WCPFC14 tasks SC14 to consider the recommendations of the recent Joint Analysis 
of Sea Turtle Mitigation Effectiveness workshops to modify the ROP Minimum Standard Data 
Fields with respect to improving the collection of data related to sea turtle interactions, taking 
into account capacity of observers and priority of data collection, and to recommend any 
modifications for the consideration of the ROP Coordinator, TCC14 and WCPFC15. SC may 
also consider possible modifications to operational level data requirements. 
AGENDA ITEM 9 – ADOPTION OF REPORTS FROM SUBSIDIARY BODIES  
364. 
Reports of the subsidiary bodies were taken as read and were not presented. The Commission 
considered under this agenda item only recommendations that were not specifically addressed under 
other agenda items. A consolidation of the relevant recommendations of each subsidiary body report 
requiring the Commission’s consideration were provided in reference documents outlined below. 
 
9.1 
13th Annual Session of the Scientific Committee (SC13) 
365. 
The Commission was referred to WCPFC14-2017-18 Synopsis of SC13 Summary Report, and 
WCPFC14-2017-SC13 Summary Report of the Thirteenth Regular Session of the Scientific Committee 
(Adopted Version), during the adoption of the SC13 Summary Report and relevant recommendations.  
64 
Guidelines for Voluntary provision of economic data to the Commission by CCMs 
366. 
Kiribati, on behalf of PNA members, strongly supported the work of the ERandEM IWG and 
hoped that a meeting of this working group could be arranged in 2018. PNA Members supported the 
proposal by FFA Members for the ERandEM IWG to meet immediately prior to SC14. Several PNA 
Members had small administrations that often were not able to send a staff member to specialist 
workshops and could not afford to have staff away for 2 weeks for a 1 or 2-day workshop. The result 
was that small administrations were often left out and excluded from stand-alone meetings. They 
supported holding this working group meeting immediately prior to the SC. 
367. 
New Zealand, on behalf of FFA Members, wished to address two outputs from the SC13 
report. Firstly, FFA Members supported the recommendation for the ERandEM IWG to convene in 
advance of SC14 and suggested immediately prior to SC14 in 2018. FFA Members were also mindful 
that the decision to hold additional meetings could only be made once a full picture of proposals for 
working groups and meetings was available nearer the end of WCPFC14. Secondly, FFA Members 
supported the Commission adopting the outputs of the Virtual Working Group to develop principles to 
inform the development of guidelines for the Voluntary Submission of Economic Data to the 
Commission, as provided in Circular 2017/87. FFA members also wished to thank the outgoing SC 
Chair, Ms. Berry Muller, and Vice-Chair, Mr. Aisake Batibasaga for their excellent service and 
leadership over the Scientific Committee in the last few years. 
368. 
The outcomes for the proposal for an ERandEM IWG meeting in 2018 can be found in the 
decisions under Agenda Item 9.3 TCC13 Report and Agenda Item 13.4 Future meetings. 
369. 
The Commission accepted the Report of the SC virtual inter-sessional working group 
on the development of guidelines for the voluntary provision of economic data to the 
Commission by CCMs (WCPFC Circular 2017/87).  The Commission agreed to the list of 
principles to inform the development of guidelines for the voluntary provision of economic 
data to the Commission by CCMs (Attachment S).   
370. 
The Commission adopted the SC13 Summary Report (WCPFC14-2017-SC13), 
noting the recommendations with budgetary implications would be considered by FAC. 
 
9.2 
13th Annual Session of the Northern Committee (NC13) 
371. 
The Commission was referred to WCPFC14-2017-NC13 NC13 Summary Report (Adopted)-
02Sep2017, during the adoption of the NC13 Summary Report and relevant recommendations.  
North Pacific blue shark 
372. 
Japan asked the Commission to discuss the NC13 recommendation (NC13 Summary Report 
paragraph 96) that WCPFC14 should decide if North Pacific blue shark should be designated as a 
Northern stock based on the available information from ISC, SPC and the advice of SC. Japan 
supported the designation of NP blue shark as a Northern stock, and clarified that the recommendation 
relates to North Pacific blue shark (rather than blue shark species). 
373. 
The European Union thanked Japan but noted that based on the discussions earlier in the 
meeting that were informed by the ISC presentation on stock status of North Pacific blue shark, it was 
unable to support the designation of North Pacific blue shark as a Northern stock at this meeting.  At 
65 
this point in time, there was not sufficient information, particularly a clear recommendation from the 
SC, to support the Commission designating this as a northern stock at this meeting.  
374. 
The United States reflected on the discussions under Agenda 7.6 for NP striped marlin, and 
noted that like for North Pacific blue shark, the question remains whether to designate as a northern 
stock.  For North Pacific striped marlin, the ISC had provided information to the SC, but the SC did 
not believe that enough information had been provided to demonstrate it was a northern stock, and has 
not made a recommendation to the Commission to consider.  For North Pacific blue shark, the NC has 
requested on three occasions that the SC provide a recommendation to the Commission to designate 
North Pacific blue shark as a northern stock, however the SC is yet to provide this advice.  Two options 
were suggested: either the Commission take a decision here based on the ISC and NC information and 
designate this as a northern stock, or that the Commission task SC to provide advice on the status of 
this species so that an informed decision could be made at WCPFC15 on whether it is a northern stock 
or not. 
375. 
The Chair noted that since at least one Member had indicated that it was unable to support the 
designation of North Pacific blue shark as a northern stock at this meeting, CCMs could consider 
tasking SC14 to prioritise a recommendation on that matter of designating NP blue shark as a northern 
stock.  There was general support for this approach.   
376. 
Palau suggested that it was important that the SC have sufficient background information from 
the ISC so that the SC was able to consider recommendations of whether the Commission should 
designate any northern stocks.  There were no contrary views expressed on this suggestion.   
377. 
The discussions related to North Pacific striped marlin for the outcome noted below are 
recorded under Agenda Item 7.6. North Pacific striped marlin.   
378. 
The Commission agreed to task SC14 to prioritise determination of whether the North 
Pacific striped marlin and North Pacific blue shark are northern stocks and as applicable 
provide updated management advice and recommendations to WCPFC15.  To support the 
SC’s consideration of these matters in 2018, the Scientific Services Provider (SPC-OFP) and 
ISC were requested to provide to SC14 papers that provide available information on the status 
of these stocks and the catch levels in their associated fisheries. 
379. 
The Commission adopted the report of NC13 (WCPFC14-2017-NC13). 
 
9.3 
13th Annual Session of the Technical and Compliance Committee (TCC13) 
380. 
The Commission was referred to WCPFC14-2017-19 Reference Paper for TCC13 
Recommendations, which provided a quick reference guide to the recommendations of the Technical 
and Compliance Committee (TCC13) of relevance to WCPFC14 discussions.  It was noted that the full 
report of TCC13 was also tabled for consideration WCPFC14-2017-TCC13 TCC13 Summary Report 
Final - issued 14 November 2017. 
FAD Management Options IWG in 2018  
381. 
Tuvalu on behalf of FFA Members noted that while much of the work stemming from the 
FAD management working group had been taken up by the SC and TCC, there were still some areas 
of outstanding work. It noted the departure of the Chair of that working group, Mr. Brian Kumasi and 
66 
thanked him for his service. FFA Members wished to nominate Mr. Bradley Philip from FSM as the 
new Chair of that working group. 
382. 
Greenpeace, Pew Charitable Trusts, WWF and Sustainable Fisheries Partnership, and ISSF, 
welcomed the appointment of officers for the FAD Working Group. They stated that FADs were critical 
gear in the WCPO fisheries and that the Commission should task the FAD Working Group with 
creating a management framework to improve data collection on FADs, and measures to mitigate the 
catch of juvenile tunas on FADs, entanglement of sharks and turtles, and the gear’s contribution to 
marine debris.  In their view, as a starting point, the working group should consider a series of best 
practices developed by a group of experts meeting at an independent FAD science symposium last 
March. They referred to Papers SC13-EB-WP-02, Review of research into drifting FAD designs to 
reduce bycatch entanglement and bigeye/yellowfin interactions; and SC13-MI-WP-06 What does well-
managed FAD use look like within a tropical tuna purse seine fishery? were discussed at SC13 and 
outlined best practices, and SC13 recommended the Commission consider those best practices and take 
into consideration the decision and position of some progressive market players when developing a 
management framework for FADs. They acknowledged that although some discussion on aspects of 
FAD management had already occurred at this meeting, it was time for a more comprehensive system 
of management for FADs, and the working group should be the vehicle to make progress on these 
issues.  
383. 
The outcomes for the proposal for a FAD Management Options IWG meeting in 2018 can be 
found in the decisions under Agenda Item 13.3 Election of Officers and Agenda Item 13.4 Future 
meetings.  
Marking and monitoring of FADs 
384. 
The Commission noted that TCC13 had supported the recommendation from SC13 
(SC13 draft Summary Report, paragraph 118) that recommends as a first step the Commission 
considers introducing a buoy ID scheme, and that field tests be undertaken to determine the 
optimal configuration of future developments of a full marking system.   
Collection of additional data on FADs 
385. 
The Commission noted the need for FAD data to be provided by ROP observers for 
all vessels involved in FAD activities, including support vessels. 
High Seas transshipment reporting 
386. 
The Chair invited FFA to introduce their paper WCPFC14-2017-DP09 Views on enhanced 
monitoring of longline vessels and transshipment activity. The FFA Secretariat responded and thanked 
the Chair for the opportunity but as the paper contained general views on issues discussed over the 
course of the meeting it did not need to be presented and any questions could be answered in the 
margins.  
387. 
The Commission agreed that CCMs are to report observer coverage achieved for their 
carrier vessels conducting transshipment at sea, in line with the vessel specifications outlined 
in paragraph 13 of CMM 2009-06, in their Annual Report Part 2. 
67 
 
ERandEM IWG meeting in 2018 
388. 
The Chair asked for comments on the decision on whether to convene the ERandEM IWG 
meeting in 2018, noting that some FFA and PNA members had already expressed support for the 
meeting to be held next year immediately prior to SC14 (refer Agenda Item 9.1 SC13 Report).  
389. 
Japan supported the ERandEM IWG meeting prior to SC14. It sought clarification on a point 
in the FFA Members paper WCPFC14-2017-DP09 Views on enhanced monitoring of longline vessels 
and transshipment activity that had suggested the topics of this meeting should include: “Consider 
development of standards for e-reporting applications in port monitoring and links with e-CDS 
development.” Japan confirmed it had no objection to the meeting but sought clarification about this 
point.  It recalled during TCC13 there were discussions related to how electronic monitoring could be 
counted as meeting observer coverage was a topic that was suggested to be included in ERandEM-
IWG meeting. Japan sought clarification about what the agenda for the ERandEM IWG meeting would 
include.   
390. 
Kerry Smith, speaking in her capacity as Chair of ERandEM IWG, confirmed that a draft 
agenda for the meeting was a matter that she had been considering and working on in consultation with 
the Secretariat.  She confirmed that her expectation based on discussions at TCC13 and informal 
discussions to date, was that how E-monitoring can be taken forward as a data collection tool in this 
Commission would be the focus of the 2018 meeting.  As Chair of the ERandEM IWG, she noted the 
adoption of ER standards for operational logbook catch and effort data by the Commission last year, 
and the further consideration for adoption at this meeting of draft ER standards for observer data to be 
fundamental to being able to progress work on electronic monitoring standards.  Members were 
thanked for their contributions to finalise the ER standards that had been made to date.  If the 
Commission did agree to a meeting of the ERandEM IWG taking place in 2018, she intended to 
circulate a draft agenda early in the year that has a focus on E-monitoring.  She would welcome 
comments and suggestions of any other topics that might be covered at that meeting.   
391. 
New Caledonia confirmed it had no objection to the FFA proposal or the suggestion to 
consider E-monitoring and E-reporting perspectives in the Commission.  It did want to make sure that 
improving electronic monitoring standards, necessarily includes improvements of the efficiency of the 
E-monitoring technology.   
392. 
Japan commented that based on the ERandEM IWG Chair’s explanation about the priority 
topics for the meeting CCMs may need to consider sending administrative staff rather than scientists 
given the substance of the meeting. It confirmed it was happy to go along with consensus if other 
CCMs prefer the meeting is held with SC14.  
393. 
The Commission agreed to hold a meeting of the ERandEM IWG in 2018, 
immediately prior to SC14. 
E-reporting standards for observer data 
394. 
The European Union commented on the TCC13 recommendation that recommends the draft 
E-reporting standards for observer data be considered for adoption (TCC13 Summary Report 
paragraph 177).  The European Union recalled that at WCPFC13, at the time that the E-reporting 
standards for operational level catch and effort data had been adopted, it had requested the inclusion 
of language that gave recognition to the UN/CEFACT’s FLUX standards.  It was an important issue 
for the European Union to ensure that E-reporting standards for the WCPFC align with the UN 
standards which are the standards that all European Union fishing vessels applied to their operations.  
It reiterated that this point had been made for several years that it was important to ensure consistency 
and compatibility between WCPFC and UN standards.  The European Union sought clarification as to 
whether the proposal in WCPFC14-2017-20 Draft standards E-reporting of observer data had duly 
68 
 
considered and recognised the UN/CEFACT’s FLUX standards as it appeared not to have done so.  It 
was further suggested that if these draft standards are adopted in their current form, the European 
Union would ask that an allowance is made for vessels using UN/CEFACT’s FLUX standards to be 
allowed to continue to report observer data using these standards.   
395. 
Japan confirmed that regarding the E-reporting standards for observer data it had 
communicated with SPC following TCC13, and their comments along with those of Chinese Taipei 
were able to be further discussed and duly considered in WCPFC14-2017-20.  They expressed regret 
if the draft e-reporting standards for observer data were not able to be adopted at this meeting.   
396. 
Fiji speaking on behalf of FFA Members, confirmed their support for the adoption of the draft 
E-reporting standards for observer data. The draft E-reporting standards have undergone some 
substantial consultation with CCMs, and they thanked SPC for hard work on the development of these 
standards.  Fiji strongly urged the adoption of these draft E-reporting standards for observer data by 
the Commission.   
397. 
The European Union confirmed that the concerns expressed were not new, and clarified that 
the E-reporting standards that are presently being used by European Union vessels are referred to 
within the draft standards to be “under development”.  The European Union had been raising this issue 
for two years. It reiterated that the intention of the European Union was not to oppose the adoption of 
these standards, but to ensure that the current standards used by the European Union vessels and which 
are international standards could continue to be used.   
398. 
Peter Williams from SPC clarified that the draft E-reporting standards only really related to 
how observer data should be submitted to the WCPFC, and nothing more. The draft E-reporting 
standards, do not prevent nor prescribe the format for how data is captured or the software that are 
used.  The intention of the language used in the current E-reporting standards adopted last year, and 
the present draft E-reporting standards presented in WCPFC14-2017-20, was to reflect the present 
understanding that UN-CEFACT standards currently do not cater for all the ROP minimum data fields.   
399. 
Australia thanked SPC and confirmed that it shared the same understanding of the purpose of 
the E-reporting standards.  It added that the E-reporting standards are intended to provide a basis for 
translation of data into WCPFC databases.  The E-reporting standards are simply replicating the current 
processes and minimum data fields, and relates to data that is currently being input into WCPFC 
databases.  The issue that is being discussed is an issue of a technical nature.  It concluded by noting 
that the adoption and publishing of the WCPFC E-reporting standards would provide an opportunity 
for the UN-CEFACT standard to include relevant minimum data fields so that it can be accommodated 
in the future.   
400. 
The Chair confirmed that WCPFC14-2017-20_rev1 had been issued to the meeting, and that 
this revision took on board the earlier discussions.   
401. 
The Commission adopted the E-reporting standards for observer data (WCPFC14-
2017-20_rev1), and agreed to include them in the standards, specifications and procedures for 
Electronic Reporting which presently include E-reporting standards for operational catch and 
effort data (Attachment T). 
High Seas transshipment E-reporting implementation at the Secretariat 
402. 
The Chair sought comments on WCPFC14-2017-21 Implementing E-reporting of high seas 
transshipment declaration and transshipment notices.  The Chair confirmed that the Secretariat was 
seeking an in-principle support from the Commission for their 2018 workplan in support of 
implementation of high seas transhipment E-reporting at the Secretariat.  It was also noted that the 
69 
 
workplan had budgetary implications that would be subject to a budgetary allocation being confirmed 
by FAC11.   
403. 
The European Union confirmed that they have been working with the Secretariat and FAC11 
towards including in the 2018 budget provision of an additional workplan activity to accommodate 
inclusion of the UN/CEFACT’s FLUX standard.   
404. 
The Chair confirmed that the 2018 approved budget included a budgetary allocation that 
catered for both the Secretariats proposed workplan WCPFC14-2017-21 and the European Union’s 
request related to the UN/CEFACT’s FLUX standard.   
405. 
The Commission noted the Secretariat paper WCPFC14-2017-21 that provided a set 
of draft standards for the E-reporting of high seas transhipment declarations and transhipment 
notices taking into consideration the requirements of CMM 2009-06 Annex I and Annex III.  
The Commission agreed that vessels could additionally use the UN/CEFACT’s FLUX 
standard for the e-reporting of high seas transhipment declarations and notices, subject to the 
information provided complying with the requirements of CMM 2009-06.  The Commission 
endorsed in principle the Secretariats proposed workplan for 2018 as set out in WCPFC14-
2017-21, and noted that FAC11, in addition to supporting the 2018 budget request, had 
allocated additional funding for the Secretariat to include in its 2018 workplan consideration 
of the UN/CEFACT’s FLUX standard in the implementation of E-reporting of high seas 
transhipment declarations and transhipment notices.   
Port Coordinators Programme 
406. 
The Chair noted the Commission needed to take a decision on the port coordinators 
programme. Members were invited to comment on the extension of this programme, noting that the 
report on the trial Port Coordinators program was provided in WCPFC14-2017-22.   
407. 
The European Union considered this programme valuable, however at previous meetings it 
had asked for more information on the programme’s benefits and how it contributed to better data 
collection, sampling and implementation. TCC13 did not have any further information to consider, as 
no reports were submitted. As no new information had been provided, the European Union was not in 
a position to confirm future funding, especially when considering the budgetary constraints of the 
Commission. It would require more information to change this position.  
408. 
Kiribati, on behalf of FFA Members, supported the extension of the Port Coordinators’ 
Programme noting it had provided useful support to some participant CCMs’ national port activities. 
The programme had contributed significantly to improving CCMs capacity to undertake transhipment 
monitoring in ports and also improving the training of observers. Port controls were promoted by many 
CCMs as being a critical part of the overall MCS framework. FFA Members were committed to 
strengthening measures and a flexible, nationally tailored program of assistance that FFA members 
could choose to participate in was considered an important contribution. Regarding reporting, FFA 
Members noted that participant CCMs had provided reports on the implementation of the programme. 
If extended, participating members would continue to report on their national implementation of the 
assistance provided, providing details on their respective outcomes and benefits. 
409. 
The Chair concluded that there was no agreement to extend the programme and the 
Commission would simply note the report WCPFC14-2017-22. 
Funding for the Global Consolidated list of Authorised Vessels (CLAV) 
70 
 
410. 
The United States noted an update on a TCC-related initiative, specifically on the 
Consolidated List of Authorised Vessels which was a joint tuna RFMO initiative that provides a single 
global register that consolidates data on all vessels operating in the tuna RFMOs. The initiative was 
established and is presently being maintained through funding by the FAO Areas Beyond National 
Jurisdiction (Common Oceans) Project.  The United States advised that it understood that funding for 
the CLAV is due to run out in 2019.  It further proposed that it would be helpful for the Commission 
to consider tasking the TCC and FAC with reviewing the utility of this initiative and consider any 
associated funding needs for this. The FAO was looking for individual tuna RFMOs contributions to 
the programme, and perhaps contributions might be based on proportionate number of vessels each 
RFMO has on their list.  
411. 
The Commission noted that the funding for the technical support to the global 
consolidated list of authorised fishing vessels would end in 2019.  The TCC and FAC were 
tasked at the 2018 meetings to review the utility of the CLAV and provide advice to 
WCPFC15. 
WCPFC approved ALC/MTU list and VMS reporting 
412. 
Palau advised WCPFC14 that FFA Members were seriously concerned with the continued 
weak stance the Commission has taken with respect to ALC/MTU models that do not meet the WCPFC 
mandatory VMS reporting requirements. The Secretariat had repeatedly recommended that Argos 
units be removed from the list of approved ALC/MTU types. The justification for the removal of the 
four Argos units was clear. These units were providing position reports greater than 90 minutes after 
being sent from the MTU, and therefore do not meet Annex 1 CMM 2014-02 requirements. In some 
cases, reporting delays can be up to 14 hours. This delay was considered unacceptable. FFA Members 
felt that TCC13’s recommendation that CCMs ensure their flagged vessels do not “purchase, install or 
transfer” these Argos units was not strong enough. And any extended or ambiguous phase-out period 
was unacceptable. FFA Members sought a decision by the Commission to i) remove these three Argos 
units from the list of approved ALC/MTU types; and ii) require any relevant CCMs to ensure their 
flagged vessels have WCPFC type-approved units installed and operational by December 2018.  
413. 
Australia supported the recommendation made by Palau and FFA Members for the 
Commission to take a decision on this issue and noted that the Commission was required to take a 
decision on an appropriate timeframe for the phase out, as referred to in paragraphs 135-137 of the 
TCC13 Summary Report. It acknowledged that the VMS was a fundamental tool for supporting MCS 
operations and such lengthy reporting delays had significant operational and cost implications. FFA 
Members have strongly supported the Secretariat’s recommendation to remove these units from the 
WCPFC list for the last two years. The VMS CMM (CMM 2014-02) was a key WCPFC measure and 
the Commission adopted its CMMs on good faith and on the understanding that CCMs had a duty to 
implement them. There may be times when a reasonable delay to implementation was necessary to 
accommodate changes in business practices but the continued use of MTUs that do not meet WCPFC 
standards and without a clear plan or commitment to phase these units out was a serious concern for 
this delegation. Australia will continue to focus on VMS compliance as part of our HSBI activities in 
the Pacific region.  
414. 
Japan thanked FFA members for raising this matter.  As Japan explained at TCC13, it fully 
understood that the Argos units did not satisfy the minimum requirement of CMM 2014-02, and for 
this reason at TCC13 it had joined the consensus on agreeing to delete these units from the WCPFC 
approved list.  However, its difficulty is for its fisherman that already purchased these units, and 
particularly those that have done so in recent times, during the period that the units were included on 
the WCPFC approved list.  Japan confirmed that it had undertaken an analysis and on average these 
units were used for 10 years and the last one was brought in April 2016. Japan preferred to allow the 
fishers time to use these units, so it proposed a phase out starting 8 years after the closure of WCPFC14. 
71 
 
415. 
China noted it had a similar problem to that described by Japan for its fleet.  China supported 
the Japan proposal for a phase out period of eight years, by 2025.  
416. 
Tokelau reminded the Commission that the removal of these units had been recommended by 
the WCPFC Secretariat for two years now. CCMs should agree to remove the Argos units from the list 
of WCPFC approved units, and to replace them in a timely fashion. Reporting violations were the most 
significant IUU threat to Pacific tuna fisheries and FFA Members took this matter very seriously. As 
mentioned by Palau, VMS reporting delays from vessels using Argos units can be as long as 14 hours. 
This reporting violation was a clear example of IUU activity that Pacific Islands Countries are working 
hard to eliminate. If no Commission decision was made to remove and replace these non-compliant 
units, FFA Members would commence actively reviewing vessels that have these units installed. Any 
vessel found not reporting according to the agreed parameters will be considered for listing under the 
IUU Vessel List. This approach sought to maintain the agreed reporting standards established by the 
Commission by ensuring vessels did not continue to undermine the provisions of the VMS CMM. 
417. 
The United States shared the views highlighting the seriousness of having so many vessels 
using non-compliant systems. It was critical that vessels use type approved units sooner. WCPFC12 
discussed this in depth and agreed on a compromise: once a VMS unit type was removed from the 
approved list, vessels would only be allowed to use those units for three years. At WCPFC13, Members 
came back unhappy with that agreed three year compromise. Unless there was new and extraordinary 
information on why this already agreed compromise would not work, the United States remained 
convinced that the three year period was the most appropriate way forward.   
418. 
Indonesia confirmed its vessels still used Argos units, as well as another type of MTU that 
was not in the WCPFC approved list.  It confirmed that it was not easy to replace VMS systems, and 
there are replacement costs.  For Indonesia, it is unclear if these replacement costs would be assumed 
by government or industry and this remains a matter that must be resolved internally.   
419. 
Canada was supportive of further progress on this issue. It did not have vessels operating in 
the WCPO area, but spoke to this issue at TCC13 and noted it had been discussed for some time and 
in the meanwhile new non-compliant units has been purchased by certain fleets. Accordingly, there 
were two issues to resolve. Firstly, that there was not another year of operators buying units that did 
not meet Commission standards; and secondly, agreement on the phase out period of existing non-
compliant units.  
420. 
Australia clarified that the Commission was presently considering whether to remove non-
compliant units from the WCPFC approved MTU list. The phase out period remained undecided, 
though Australia could support a period of three years. It thanked the Secretariat for Annual VMS 
report that is submitted to TCC, and asked for future papers to include the number of vessels reporting 
from Argos units to track changes in the number of these units being used per year to demonstrate if 
the usage of non-compliant MTUs was actually decreasing over time.  
421. 
The Chair summarised that the TCC13 recommendation had included an additional 
recommendation for a date on when those units should be phased out, so the Commission needed to 
agree on when that should occur. The United States noted a three year phase out provision had already 
been agreed, which would start from now if the Commission decided to remove those non-compliant 
units at this meeting. Chair noted Japan and China suggestion that eight years was more appropriate 
for them.  The Chair asked that Australia work with interested parties to further discuss the issue.   
422. 
The Chair advised that Australia had tabled a draft outcome for consideration in WCPFC14-
2017-DP31 and a discussion ensued. 
423. 
The Commission approved the addition of the Triton Advance MTU and Skymate 
I1500 VMS to the WCPFC approved ALC/MTU list.   
72 
 
424. 
The Commission agreed that CCMs shall ensure that vessels flying their flag do not 
purchase, install or transfer the following VMS units: FVT, MAR GE, MAR GE V2, and 
MAR GE V3 (all Argos units) and that they be removed from the WCPFC approved 
ALC/MTU list. The Commission further agreed that existing units on vessels shall be allowed 
to continue to operate for 5 years (until 1 January 2023). CCMs whose vessels use these 
models shall provide a list of vessels that are using the units to the Secretariat and shall update 
the list annually.    
425. 
The Commission tasked the Secretariat to coordinate, as necessary, with the VMS 
service provider to provide additional functionality in its 'Commission VMS-reporting status 
tool' in a web-based, exportable matrix. The new tool should separately, in addition to the data 
listed in the current tool, provide authorized flag CCM MCS entities each of their vessel's 
daily VMS-reporting status (how many position reports are transmitted by each vessel on each 
date), and determine and display a generic vessel status ('in port' or 'at sea', for example). 
Historical Record of Fishing Vessels (RFV) data 
426. 
Australia indicated that it wished to discuss access to historical data for the Record of Fishing 
Vessels, referring to paragraph 239 of the TCC13 Summary Report.  Australia on behalf of FFA 
Members noted the Secretariat’s update at TCC13 regarding its work to develop mechanisms to access 
and analyse historical information from the RFV. At TCC13, there was limited discussion of these 
developments. FFA Members provided the following responses to questions raised by the Secretariat 
at TCC13: i) FFA members considered historical RFV information as part of the RFV and, as such, 
should be considered “public domain information” in accordance with the WCPFC data access rules 
and procedures. This included related fields on fishing/non-fishing and interim lists of Non-Member 
Carrier and Bunker Vessels. ii) FFA Members requested that the RFV file in full should be periodically 
updated and made available for download from the WCPFC website until an automated extraction 
functionality was made available. iii) FFA Members considered this data as ‘historical data’ and it 
should not be subject to any revision by any party, unless associated arrangements for documentation 
and verification of changes could be agreed. 
427. 
The Chair clarified that the paper by the Secretariat to TCC13 provided an update on 
mechanisms that it had developed to disseminate historical RFV data.  The Secretariat welcomed the 
response to its questions and confirmed that it did not have anything further to add.  
428. 
The Commission noted the Secretariat’s update at TCC13 regarding its work to 
develop mechanisms to access and analyse historical information from the Record of Fishing 
Vessels, and that there was limited discussion of these developments during TCC13.  The 
Commission thanked the Secretariat for its update, and agreed that: 
i. historical RFV information should be considered part of the Record of Fishing Vessels and, 
as such, should be considered “public domain information” in accordance with the WCPFC 
data access rules and procedures. This includes related fields on fishing/non-fishing and 
interim lists of Non-Member Carrier and Bunker vessels. 
ii. the Record of Fishing Vessels file in full should be periodically updated by the Secretariat 
and made available for download from the WCPFC website until an automated extraction 
functionality is made available; 
iii. this data should be considered as ‘historical data’ and it should not be subject to any 
revision by any party, unless associated arrangements for documentation and verification of 
changes can be agreed. 
73 
 
High Seas Boarding and Inspection 
The Commission tasked the Secretariat to make the list of vessels previously inspected under 
the HSBI scheme, published https://www.wcpfc.int/ccm/hsbi-report, exportable in MS Excel 
and CSV format to authorised CCM users. 
TCC14 ‘plastic bottle’ free 
429. 
The Commission agreed to the TCC13 recommendation that TCC14 be 'plastic bottle' 
free. 
TCC13 Summary report 
430. 
The Commission adopted the report of TCC13 (WCPFC14-2017-TCC13). 
AGENDA ITEM 10 – COMPLIANCE MONITORING SCHEME 
10.1 
Consideration and Adoption of the Final Compliance Monitoring Report 
431. 
The Commission considered the provisional Compliance Monitoring Report recommended 
by TCC13 and additional information provided by CCMs. WCPFC14’s consideration of the 
provisional Compliance Monitoring Report took place in a small working group led by the TCC Chair, 
which compiled the final Compliance Monitoring Report for adoption. 
432. 
The TCC Chair provided a report to the Commission on the outcome of the SWG and the 
following points were highlighted: 
• WCPFC14 undertook its seventh annual review of compliance by CCMs against an updated 
priority list of Commission obligations agreed to at WCPFC13 for 2016 – 2018. (Attachment 
I to WCPFC13 Summary Report).  
• WCPFC14 and TCC13 conducted its review in accordance with the revised Compliance 
Monitoring Scheme (CMS) adopted at WCPFC12 – CMM 2015-07. Unlike past versions of 
the CMS, the current CMS did not require an overall assessment of each CCM, but only 
asked WCPFC to identify a compliance assessment for each specific obligation.   
• A number of CCMs provided additional information between TCC13 and WCPFC14. A 
small working group met in closed session during WCPFC14 to review and evaluate the 
additional information, and was chaired by TCC Chair Alexa Cole (United States). The small 
working group considered all additional information, including for CCMs not present at the 
working group meetings.   
• After considering the additional information, the small working group was unable to assess 
five obligations for certain CCMs contained in the following measures: CMM 2009-03, para 
2, CMM 2015-01, para 14, CMM 2014-02, paras 9a and SSPs 2.8, Convention Article 25 (2), 
and SciData 03.  
• In accordance with Annex I of the CMS CMM, the following statuses were considered in 
making the assessments: Compliant, Non-Compliant, Priority Non-Compliant, Capacity 
Assistance Needed, Flag State Investigation and CMM Review. 
433. 
The TCC Chair expressed her gratitude to Dr Lara Manarangi-Trott and ‘Ana Taholo from 
the Secretariat and to Peter Williams and Graham Pilling from SPC, noting their significant 
contribution to the implementation and development of the compliance scheme over many years. She 
74 
 
observed that it was important to note that when considering the future of the CMS and in the 
development of a revised measure, that CCMs did not lose sight of the significant progress the 
Commission had made over the years and especially how delegates had transformed into very 
sophisticated and highly engaged participants in the scheme, compared with early meetings.  
434. 
The Chair acknowledged the work of the Secretariat and SPC, and further thanked them and 
the TCC Chair on their continued collective efforts to drive the compliance process forward and find 
efficiencies.  
435. 
The European Union sought clarification on some aspects noting that it was unable to 
participate in all sessions of the CMR-SWG due to its small delegation. New Zealand noted that FFA 
Members would also welcome the opportunity to talk with the TCC Chair about a couple of issues in 
the final draft CMR.  
436. 
Canada provided a general comment on the Compliance Monitoring Scheme and its outcomes.  
They noted their primary interest is in the Northern stocks and confirmed that there were no Canadian 
flagged fishing vessels in the Convention Area for 2016. In reflecting on the Compliance Monitoring 
Scheme outcomes, Canada admitted that on occasion being somewhat puzzled and perplexed at the 
outcomes.  Canada despite having no fishing vessels operating in the Convention Area was deemed 
non-compliant. In making this point, Canada confirmed that it does accept this outcome, because the 
non-compliant scores related to missed reporting deadlines and recently there have been some fields 
on the RFV that are incomplete.  Canada noted though that the outcome for the WCPFC VMS 
requirements also provides a puzzling outcome in the Compliance Monitoring Scheme.  The 
requirements for VMS are clearly specified in the Convention in Article 24 (paragraphs 8 and 9) and 
they are clearly a flag State responsibility.  Yet the four elements that are reviewed in this year’s 
Compliance Monitoring Report (covering 2016 activities) have either provided CCMs with fully 
compliant scores or the Commission has not been able to assess the obligations.  These outcomes in 
the final CMR is despite there being data and information that was discussed openly here at this 
meeting, that confirmed that some MTU units that are presently being used in the region have a delay 
of up to 14 hours.  It also is aware of information that confirms that vessels have been inspected on the 
high seas and were confirmed to be using a VMS that is not reporting to WCPFC VMS.  Considering 
these points, Canada urged that when the review of the Compliance Monitoring Scheme is further 
examined, that the Commission should look more broadly at how the Commission is doing its business 
in general, and the Compliance Monitoring Scheme CMM necessary to be able to support the decisions 
of the Commission, and for this Commission to be able to provide clear advice on monitoring, control 
and surveillance.   
437. 
Vanuatu noticed that it is still listed in the Final Compliance Monitoring Report with a 
“capacity assistance needed” score.  It confirmed that its capacity need has been addressed, and it asked 
that the final report is corrected to reflect this. 
438. 
The Commission adopted the Final Compliance Monitoring Report (WCPFC14-2017-
finalCMR), and the Chair thanked the TCC Chair for her work in leading the SWG.   
439. 
The Commission accepted the Final Compliance Monitoring Report (WCPFC14-
2017-finalCMR, Attachment U).  
10.2 
Update on the Independent Review of Compliance Monitoring Scheme 
440. 
The Chair opened discussions, noting that the Secretariat had provided paper WCPFC14-
2017-25A, Update on the Independent Review of the Compliance Monitoring Scheme, as an update on 
the progress of the Independent Review of the Compliance Monitoring Scheme (CMS). The paper was 
noted to contain a suggested process to facilitate and support the CCMs consideration of the Report 
75 
 
from the CMS Review, following the Reports submission at the end of February 2018 and before it is 
tabled at WCPFC15.  
441. 
The Chair referred the meeting to WCPFC14-2017-25B Independent Review of the 
Compliance Monitoring Scheme: Substantive Progress Report by the Review Panel, which updated 
Members on the progress of the Review and a large number of issues that have been identified. 
442. 
The Independent Review Panel, Chair Mr Don Mackay, Dr Chris Rogers and Mr Andrew 
Wright were then invited to present an update on the independent review of the Compliance 
Monitoring Scheme.  The Panel confirmed its understanding from the terms of reference that the 
expected output from the Review would be “an assessment of the efficacy of current structure of the 
CMS, and to be forward looking in providing suggestions for improvement”. The Review commenced 
work in June, and undertook research and initial consultations through August, including holding a 
meeting that was supported by the Secretariat and where some conference calls with key CCM 
representatives were arranged.  During September the Don and Chris observed the TCC13 session, and 
had consultation with a number of participants.  In December, the Review panel observed the 
WCPFC14 session and had continued consultations with participants.  In March 2018 the Report is to 
be submitted.  Each of the Review Panel members then contributed to the presentation, which intended 
to present some initial thoughts of the Panel as contained in WCPFC14-2017-25B as well as some 
ideas to stimulate further consultation and encourage further input.  The Panel was also looking to 
participants to assist them in identifying gaps and issues in the report to date.   
443. 
Andrew Wright presented an overview of the Panels understanding of how the CMS is 
contributing to the work of the Commission.  Points that were noted in the presentation of matters 
related to contributions made included: improved submission of Annual Reporting since the 
commencement of the CMS; information sharing/shared appreciation of challenges associated with 
obligations; greater attention to CMM drafting to be clearer about matters of interpretation and 
strengthening of reporting deadlines; improved information/data availability for example operational 
level catch and effort data submission had improved; better utilisation by the Commission of data 
submitted under CMMs and other CMS sanctioned sources of information.  The capacity development 
plan and flag State investigation scores were noted to be positive recently included components of the 
CMS, but it was noted that capacity development plans need to be appropriately resourced and 
harmonised with other similar initiatives.  Institutionally, the CCMs were receiving positive support 
through the commission in the form of the Information Management System (IMS), and there was 
demonstrated significant investment at the national level to monitor, report and engage in the CMS 
process.  Secretariat was noted to be very responsive and proactive in servicing CCMs’ CMS 
requirements, and their hard work and efforts deserve acknowledgement.     
444. 
Chris Rogers presented an overview of the Panel’s findings in respect of issues that have 
arisen in the discussions to date, including CCMs concerns.  The presentation was divided into three 
areas, and questions set out for each area: i) Effectiveness – does the current CMS enable the WCPFC 
to achieve its conservation and management objectives? Some of the points identified included: the 
potential of the CMS appears yet to be realised as many CMM requirements have changed since CMS 
was introduced, it was difficult to gauge the impact of Capacity Development Plans and there may be 
other factors, such as the absence of consequences for non-compliance, that mask the capacity-related 
compliance deficiencies.  ii) Efficiency – are the resources that are applied to the current CMS 
sufficient to achieve objectives? Are the resource demands excessive or incorrectly applied?  Some of 
the points identified included: the current CMS is resource demanding, the number of CMMs and level 
of detail subject to audit is resource/time consuming, lack of focus of the CMS on most serious issues 
of non-compliance, focus on detailed assessments precludes strategic focus on major issues, and 
holdover of unresolved CMS matters from the TCC meeting impacts the work of the Commission.  iii) 
Procedural fairness – are CCMs assessed fairly and consistently with regard to compliance with CMM 
obligations?  Does the outcome of the CMS process assist all CCMs in achieving compliance? Some 
of the points identified included: some significant challenges in assessing compliance in certain 
situations; ambiguity in CMM interpretation; adequate notices of potential compliance deficiencies 
76 
 
and opportunity to prepare responses; practicality of implementation of a CMM and expected remedial 
response; inconsistent compliance assessments across CCMs with similar situations and clarity needed 
in expectations for reporting Flag State Investigation status.   
445. 
Don MacKay concluded with some of the considerations of the Panel in looking forward. 
First, it was noted that the Commission needed to reduce the burden of material that CCMs need to 
provide, particularly where duplicates information already provided and focus should also be on 
information which contributes to management decisions.  It was important to reduce the volume of 
material to be discussed in TCC and focus on what is important, rather than minutiae, and consider the 
introduction of a pre-screening process as in ICCAT. Second, it was important to clarify the 
requirements under CMMs, including reporting requirements and to provide a longer development 
time for CMMs, including drafting processes.  Part of the work that should be started is a review of 
existing CMMs for relevance, and clarity, with a 2-year moratorium on new (non-urgent) CMMs to 
provide time for this.  Third, in respect of capacity building proposals, it was clear that the present 
system and implementation need to be improved and further consideration needed to be given to other 
proposals to enhance training and assistance.  Fourth, fairness, effectiveness and efficiency issues at a 
broader level, requires common standards and means of assessment across all fisheries.  There is an 
issue of procedural fairness (“natural justice”) and CCMs need to be clearly and fully informed about 
allegations of non-compliance, given opportunity fully to put their case, against previously established 
criteria for assessment and given a fair “hearing” by others, without unfairness or bias, and on a 
consistent basis with all.  Finally, there was a need to address responses to non-compliance and a 
suggestion at least as an interim measure of a CCSBT Quality Assurance Review (QAR) type system 
in response to serious or systemic failures.  Such an approach would both assist CCMs in question to 
identify any issues, and be a process for recommendations to be made, and be done with a view to 
assisting CCMs rather than “sanctioning” them.  The Panel concluded noting that the presentation and 
the table in WCPFC14-2017-25B were still a work in progress and they welcomed feedback and 
further thoughts.   
446. 
The Chair reminded delegates that the Final Report of the Independent Review Panel would 
be submitted in March 2018 which was in the Commission’s intersessional period. Accordingly, there 
was a need to consider how CCMs wanted to take this forward.  The Chair welcomed comments on 
this work but reiterated that the Panel was available in the margins of this meeting if CCMs had specific 
comments to be incorporated into the Review Panel Report.    
447. 
Canada thanked the Panel for the information provided in the interim report and found the 
presentation useful. Canada considered this organisation as a teenager; on the process side there was a 
fairly solid process running, but at the strategic level there was much opportunity to make progress. 
This valuable work put the organisation in a good position to move ahead and better plan for the future. 
On the issue of how the Commission should consider the Panel’s Final Report, it suggested assigning 
that work to the next TCC meeting for consideration. TCC14 could also assess and develop a work 
plan to address various recommendations coming from the Review Panel which could then be 
considered at WCPFC15. 
448. 
Tokelau on behalf of FFA Members thanked the Panel for their hard work on the review of 
the CMS and for their progress report. FFA Members provided their preliminary views in WCPFC14-
2017-DP06 prior to the submission of the progress report. FFA Members confirmed that they had 
submitted another Delegation Paper WCPFC14-2017-DP28 setting out their detailed response to 
some of the issues raised in the progress report by the Panel (WCPFC14-2017-25B). They outlined 
the following general comments:  
• The need to explicitly cover audit points in the design of each CMM, resource 
considerations, clear reporting requirements and how compliance will be assessed; 
77 
 
• It was essential for the Scheme to recognise and address two key fundamental areas (i) the 
need to build capacity, and to do so in a manner that complements existing national processes 
and (ii) the need to ensure that the Scheme was procedurally fair and produced fair outcomes;  
• There was a clear need to improve the CMS in order to ensure that it was robust, fair, 
transparent and efficient, and produced meaningful assessments in a timely manner to inform 
management decisions; 
• The current CMS has become a long, drawn out process and unsustainable, and it would be 
critical to revisit the timing of review processes and the current list of obligations to be 
assessed; 
• It was essential to clarify the scope of the Scheme such that it properly and fairly assesses 
implementation of CCM obligations, including meeting flag State responsibilities; and 
• That a process needs to be set up to commence the development of remedial responses 
which help countries work towards compliance. 
Furthermore, in looking at the operation of the existing process over the last few years, it was clear to 
FFA Members that some of these points would demand redesign of the CMS that goes beyond mere 
tweaks to the existing measure. FFA members confirmed that they looked forward to further 
discussions with the Panel to ensure CMS improvements. 
449. 
WWF on behalf of WWF, ISSF, International Pole and Line Foundation, International 
Environmental Law Project, Pew Charitable Trusts, Greenpeace and Sustainable Fisheries Partnership 
thanked the consultants on the comprehensive amount of work completed to date, and they appreciated 
the opportunity to provide feedback into the process. They were curious as to whether consultants had 
considered some of the issues of transparency in the process and particularly the admission of 
observers into the process.  They said that there has been a spirit of consideration to look into processes, 
and noted there has been a bit of backsliding in the process of developing the tropical tuna measure 
and the compliance monitoring scheme in general. It welcomed the Review Panels consideration and 
recommendations on these aspects for the CMS and the Commission going forward.   
450. 
Don McKay responded that the Panel had received comments on the need to develop a 
possible way forward to address the need for greater transparency in this organisation and there is a 
section in the paper providing a suggestion of how this might be addressed. Comments were received 
confirming support for greater transparency, on the other hand there were comments received 
suggesting that the system needed to develop further before it could be fully open. The Panel’s advice 
was that it was important to address the issue of transparency, in recognition that civil society 
organisation made an important contribution to an organisation over time and over a number of areas. 
One possibility identified by the Panel in the paper was a suggestion for CCMs to include members of 
civil society on their delegations.  It was noted that whilst such a suggestion was not formally 
transparent and only in a limited area, in practice there was significant level of transparency that could 
be provided. The Panel looked forward to receiving further feedback on that approach as well as others.  
451. 
Australia thanked the Panel for the comprehensive initial report and looked forward to their 
Final Report. Regarding Canada’s proposal on what TCC might need to consider next year.  On behalf 
of FFA Members, it advised that these CCMs were hoping next year’s TCC would consider what a 
future WCPFC Compliance Monitoring Scheme might start to look like.  It clarified that this was the 
basis for FFA Members’ suggestion that a reduced list of obligations be considered at next year’s TCC, 
with a view to freeing up space to consider what a draft CMS CMM might look like.  It urged that this 
meeting consider the process of how a draft measure for CMS would be developed over 2018 and in 
advance of TCC, rather than only considering a process of considering the recommendations of the 
Panel’s final report.  
452. 
New Zealand further noted that FFA Members had been discussing what such processes might 
look like mindful of the timeframes agreed to at the next Commission meeting. WCPFC14 could 
78 
 
appoint a CCM to develop and distribute a draft CMM to members before SC14. Advice could then 
be incorporated for formal consideration at TCC13. FFA Members would like to have the Republic of 
the Marshall Islands considered to lead that process.   
453. 
The European Union also thanked the Panel, though it was still of the opinion that the Review 
was premature as the current CMS CMM had not been in place for long. It was therefore difficult to 
evaluate the effectiveness of the measure because some concepts within it were still relatively new. 
Postponing the review for one more year might have been better as there had been three CMS CMMs 
developed in the last five years. Now there was a proposal from FFA Members to develop another 
measure at the next meeting, which seemed rushed.  
454. 
The European Union could clearly support the intention to improve the CMS. It also attached 
a lot of importance to the issue of transparency. It also supported consideration of the Panel’s final 
report recommendations as suggested by Canada, but noted this process needed to be guided. TCC14 
could look into the findings of the report thoroughly, and then a discussion paper could be tabled at 
WCPFC15.  
455. 
The United States thanked the Panel for the helpful analysis of the issues heard around the 
room over the year. The United States was sensitive to the comments of the European Union and FFA 
Members, and thought the Commission needed to give some priority to developing a solid CMS 
measure. The work to revise the CMS should at least begin this year and should not wait until the final 
report was submitted to the Commission formally at the next annual session. It appreciated the offer 
of Republic of the Marshall Islands to lead that work.  
456. 
The Republic of the Marshall Islands appreciated the Panel’s work. It welcomed guidance by 
other CCMs on how to proceed as the current CMS CMM was due to lapse. Moving forward there 
needed to be an acknowledgment that the measures adopted over the years had not been a level playing 
field and had been quite challenging for SIDS. Any new or revised measures should be designed 
specifically for the unique challenges of this Commission to ensure the fishery was well managed. It 
was thankful for the nomination from New Zealand and other FFA Members, and while shy about 
leading this work it was an issue very important to them.  
457. 
The Republic of Korea expressed deep gratitude to the Panel for its very well-structured 
progress report. It was pleased its views were reflected in that report and that a comprehensive analysis 
had been provided covering eleven areas. It suggested that it would be helpful if a gap analysis of 
individual legal systems to implement existing CMMs and other obligations could also be 
incorporated.   
458. 
The Chair summarised that based on the discussions to date there were two options that had 
received support.  First that the TCC is tasked to consider the Review Report recommendations.  
Second that an intersessional working group is tasked with developing a draft CMM for consideration 
at TCC.   
459. 
Australia expressed their preference for the second option and noted that under this approach, 
it felt that the Review Report would likely receive consideration through the intersessional working 
groups work as well as during TCC at the time that the IWG presents its report of progress.  It felt that 
this provided the best opportunity to ensure that a draft CMM on the CMS would be developed through 
2018.   
460. 
Canada confirmed that an intersessional discussion would be a helpful way to consider the 
priorities and approaches to addressing the issues identified in the Review.   
461. 
The Commission agreed to establish an Intersessional Working Group on the Review 
of the Compliance Monitoring Scheme (CMS IWG).  The tasks of the Intersessional Working 
Group will be to facilitate consideration of the Report from the Independent Review of the 
79 
 
Compliance Monitoring Scheme (due by March 2018) and develop a proposed Conservation 
and Management Measure for the Compliance Monitoring Scheme for consideration at 
WCPFC15.  The Commission also decided that Republic of Marshall Islands would lead the 
Intersessional Working Group.   
10.3 
Expiry of CMM 2015-07 at the end of 2017 
462. 
The Chair opened discussions on the expiration of CMM 2015-07 on the Compliance 
Monitoring Scheme which expires at the end of 2017, and noted that TCC13 discussed this but did not 
have a consensus recommendation, with a majority recommending to extend the existing measure.  
463. 
The Republic of Marshall Islands noted it was regrettable that TCC13 could not agree on a 
recommendation to WCPFC14 on the expiration of CMM 2015-07 at the end of 2017. It inquired in 
absence of consensus, what would be the options moving forward.    
464. 
The Chair reiterated the need for the Commission to decide on a way forward with this 
measure as it would expire at the end of December 2017. TCC13 discussed the issue but could not 
agree on whether to extend the measure for 2018 though a majority of CCMs supported a one-year 
extension.     
465. 
The European Union strongly supported the continuation of the current measure. It expressed 
that it would be very worrying if the Commission did not have a framework to continue its compliance 
monitoring.  
466. 
Australia on behalf of FFA Members referred to the views of FFA members that are contained 
in WCPFC14-2017-DP06 Views on Independent Audit of the Compliance Monitoring Scheme.  FFA 
Members could agree to rollover CMM 2015-07 for one year only based on two conditions. Firstly, 
that far less time, preferably one day, was given to the CMR process at TCC14 to assess a much-
reduced and high-priority set of CMMs including: the Record of Fishing Vessels; Vessel Monitoring 
System; Regional Observer Programme; transhipment; tropical tuna; south Pacific albacore; Pacific 
bluefin tuna; Scientific Data rules. This would allow for a reasonable amount of time to prioritise work 
on a revised CMS measure, taking into account the recommendations of the independent review. 
Secondly, that the duplicative reporting burden specific to scientific data was addressed at this 
Commission meeting. FFA Members sought the support of all Commission members in addressing 
these key criteria.  In the more detailed delegation paper WCPFC14-2017-DP28, CCMs were asked 
to take due note that FFA members have highlighted the significant concerns they have with the current 
system and they requested that CCMs take due note that FFA support to a decision to allow a one-year 
roll-over has come at significant discomfort. FFA stated that it is incumbent on all CCMs to approach 
the redesign of the CMM next year in an open manner to address the concerns so as not to risk cessation 
of the Scheme beyond 2018.  
467. 
Japan noted that it was one of the CCMs that blocked consensus at TCC13. It clarified that its 
intention at TCC13 was not to stop the Compliance Monitoring Scheme, rather it opposed a simple 
roll-over because a review was necessary.  After reviewing the Independent Panel consultant report, it 
confirmed that it was able to join consensus for the rollover of the scheme. Regarding FFA members 
conditions for the rollover, Japan supported focusing only on high priority set of CMMs for the CMR 
process at TCC14noting that it saw benefit to both SIDS and all CCMs.  As far as the proposal was for 
one-year application, Japan confirmed it could support the proposed approach of FFA members.  On 
the second condition, it indicated some discomfort with CCMs not submitting Annual Report Part 2. 
This report was seen as an important record that all CCMs should submit annually as a declaration 
confirming the CCMs annual implementation of measures.   
80 
 
468. 
Solomon Islands delivered a statement on behalf of PNA members, in support of the FFA 
position in DP06. PNA members agree to a one-year roll-over of CMM 2015-07, on condition that the 
CMR work at TCC13 is much reduced and the reporting burdens are reduced.  
469. 
The European Union was concerned about the statements from PNA and FFA members. It 
seemed that either WCPFC14 agreed to their conditions or there could be no agreement to allow for 
the measure to rollover. It reminded CCMs that it was important to have a CMS measure in place.  
470. 
The United States shared the sentiments expressed by Japan and to a certain extent by the 
European Union. It was comfortable with the list of obligations proposed for inclusion in the CMS 
next year in the FFA paper as it made sense to reduce the time spent on the CMS process.  The United 
States could not agree to the discussions being limited to only one day, but it could consider a more 
limited list of obligations for 2018 CMS, noting that this would likely reduce the length of time 
ordinarily spent at TCC for CMR reviews. It was concerned with the second condition of the rollover 
that the duplicative reporting requirements be eliminated, whilst it could see that reporting was 
burdensome to SIDS, they are also burdensome to all other CCMs, to the Secretariat to SPC-OFP and 
to TCC. Given this, it proposed that some work be undertaken to address duplicative reporting and that 
this be a recommendation from this meeting to ensure that progress is made.  It indicated that some 
specific language that provided softer consideration in recognition of the burdensome nature of 
reporting to SIDS could be considered, but confirmed that the language set out in DP06 was too broad 
based and unclear for it to be acceptable in its current form.  It was open to further discussions, but 
needed clearer language to be formulated.   
471. 
Samoa responded by noting there were several implications of the CMS on the small islands 
developing states and the intention was to provide an opportunity to address those implications.  The 
idea being that over the next twelve months small islands developing states would require adequate 
time to fully address those issues of concern.   
472. 
The Chair noted there was broad support for the extension of the measure. The Chair explained 
that the idea was to create sufficient time during TCC14 to allow for the consideration of the CMS 
review report and the development of a CMS measure.  The Chair also acknowledged that the 
duplicative reporting requirements was a key issue to resolve and she asked that FFA provide a list 
and some suggestions around how this might be addressed to provide further clarity around the 
recommendation so that other CCMs can further consider this.   
473. 
The Commission agreed that FFA members would provide some further detail on the 
duplicative reporting aspect and for CCMs that had comments on the list of obligations provided in 
DP06, to communicate their edits to Australia who would provide an update.   
474. 
Australia briefly introduced the document related to the list of obligations and in this respect 
it noted that WCPFC14-2017-DP06_rev1 attachment 1 had been circulated and provided a revised 
draft list of obligations to be reviewed by the CMS in 2018.  The revised list was adopted following 
further discussions that took place in the meeting margins.   
475. 
The Republic of the Marshall Islands introduced revised WCPFC14-2017-DP29 which 
provided some points in respect of addressing duplicative reporting and the rollover of CMM 2015-07 
(WCPFC14-2017-DP29).  The recommendation relating to duplicative reporting and the rollover of 
CMM 2015-07 was adopted.    
476. 
The Commission agreed to adopt CMM 2017-07 Conservation and Management 
Measure for the Compliance Monitoring Scheme (Attachment W), which will be effective 
for 2018 only.   
81 
 
477. 
The Commission adopted a revised list of obligations to be assessed by the 
Compliance Monitoring Scheme in 2018 (Attachment V), which will replace the multi-year 
list of obligations that was adopted at WCPFC13. 
478. 
The Commission noted that in submitting WCPFC14-2017-DP29, FFA member 
CCMs had provided an initial analysis and reiterated their view expressed during TCC13 that 
the essential scientific information already provided as operational level catch and effort data 
submissions earlier in the year must be recognised as meeting obligations to provide a number 
of required reporting obligations specified to be included in Annual Report Part 1.  It was also 
expressed that rather than have CCMs submit duplicative information there must be 
improvements made to facilitate access to data that is already made available to the 
Commission. 
479. 
The Commission agreed to task the Secretariat, in consultation with SPC, to review 
the Commission’s reporting requirements to minimise duplicate reporting by CCMs, with a 
particular focus on streamlining the provision and accessibility of scientific data to the 
Commission, as well as to prioritise the enhancement of the Commission’s information 
management system in response to that review, and report back to WCPFC15. 
480. 
The Commission encouraged CCMs to submit their Annual Report Part 1 in a timely 
manner, and note this is linked to TCC’s efforts to minimise verbal reports to the CMR 
process.   
AGENDA ITEM 11 – ADOPTION OF THE 2018 IUU VESSEL LIST 
481. 
The Chair introduced WCPFC14-2017-26 WCPFC IUU Vessel List for 2018, which 
presented for the consideration of WCPFC14 the relevant information for a decision on the 2018 
WCPFC IUU Vessel List.  
482. 
Australia drew attention to three key TCC13 recommendations regarding the need for the 
Commission to seek cooperation and information from relevant CCMs, flag States, and other relevant 
bodies for additional information on IUU fishing activities in the Convention Area. Australia requested 
that the Executive Director write to the Regional Plan of Action to Promote Reasonable Fishing 
Practices (RPOA-IUU), and to Asian colleagues as reasonable port state countries that may have some 
additional information to share with the Commission regarding IUU activities in the WCPO.   
483. 
The Commission adopted the 2018 WCPFC IUU Vessel List (Attachment X).  
484. 
The Commission agreed to seek the cooperation of those CCMs or flag States to whom 
the vessel was flagged at the time the vessel was placed on the WCPFC IUU Vessel List and 
other CCMs’ cooperation to actively find out any information about these vessels and inform 
the Commission. 
485. 
The Commission requested that CCMs provide prompt advice to the Commission by 
all CCMs if the vessels have been located or, if there are any known changes to name, flag or 
registered owner, including any action that the port States have taken such as denial of port 
entry and services to those vessels or any information from the cannery States of any landings 
made by these vessels.  
486. 
The Commission tasked the Executive Director to write a letter to other RFMOs and 
relevant bodies conveying this same message for cooperation to locate these vessels.  The 
82 
 
Executive Director was asked to include in these letters the Regional Plan of Action for 
Responsible fishing, including IUU fishing.   
AGENDA ITEM 12 – REPORT OF THE ELEVENTH ANNUAL SESSION OF THE 
FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION COMMITTEE 
12.1 
Report of the Eleventh Finance and Administration Committee 
487. 
The Commission considered the report of FAC11 (WCPFC14-2017-FAC11). The FAC Co-
Chair Wataru Tanoue (Japan) thanked those CCMs that participated in the FAC sessions on 2, 6, 7 
December 2017. Main recommendations included: that the Secretariat is to draft a proposed 
amendment to the financial regulations providing for the establishment of a contingency reserve fund 
dedicated to planned maintenance of physical assets; a review of options to provide a supplementary 
retirement scheme for the Secretariat’s support staff; and the continuation of the Special Requirements 
Fund Intersessional Working Group to develop a Strategic Investment Plan. 
12.2 
Budget approval for 2018 and Indicative Budgets for 2019 and 2020 
488. 
The Commission considered for adoption the Budget for 2018 and indicative budgets for 2019 
and 2020 (WCPFC14-2017-FAC11). 
489. 
The Commission adopted the report of the Eleventh Session of the FAC (WCPFC14-
2017-FAC11), including the 2018 budget of $ 8,028,552 and indicative budgets for 2019 and 
2020 of $ 8,215,645 and $ 8,061,369 respectively (Attachments Y and Z). 
AGENDA ITEM 13 – ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS 
13.1 
Strategic Plan 
490. 
The Executive Director introduced WCPFC14-2017-27 Strategic Plan that sought guidance 
from the Commission on how to further pursue the development of a Strategic Plan for the Commission 
and its Secretariat. WCPFC13 tasked the Secretariat with progressing the development of a Strategic 
Plan in 2017 with interested CCMs and to report back to WCPFC14. In response to the mixed reactions 
to the need for such a plan, the Executive Director undertook informal consultations with several 
CCMs during the intersessional period to identify a way forward. Feedback was mixed, with some 
CCMs considering that while the strategic plan was an important piece of work there were other far 
more important priorities for 2017 like the tropical tuna measure negotiations, developing a target 
reference for South Pacific albacore, and the Independent Review of the CMS. Others shared doubts 
as to the utility of a Strategic Plan with the Convention as the principal document for the Commission. 
So, the Secretariat decided it was not ideal to engage members in another intersessional process in 
2017 and no further work was done on the Strategic Plan. The Secretariat sought clear guidance from 
the Commission on whether it requires a Strategic Plan and if it does the Commission should determine 
a process to develop such a plan that is more robust, CCMs led, inclusive and participatory. 
491. 
The European Union noted that it was in favour of developing the process further and that it 
appreciated the efforts made in preparing the paper for this meeting. A strategic plan gave the 
organisation direction, which the European Union believed was essential for the good management of 
an organisation and the efficient allocation of resources, whether human or financial. It was also 
important to ensure the process was inclusive so that all members who wanted to contribute could do 
so.  
83 
 
492. 
The United States thanked the Executive Director for his report, and like the European Union, 
saw value in a Strategic Plan as it could help the Commission function more effectively. Like SIDS, 
the United States also felt its concerns were not properly included during the development process. 
Being mindful of the work load of the organisation, and the relationship tensions stemming from the 
tropical tuna bridging measure negotiations, it did not support expending further resources on the 
further development of the plan at this stage and did not support further in person meetings, though 
this could be picked up again at a later time.  
493. 
Japan agreed that the plan was not needed right now, as the Convention itself and the 
Workplan was already sufficient to guide the work of the WCPFC. The Commission should use its 
time right now to concentrate on the CMMs.  
494. 
Palau, on behalf of PNA Members, supported the United States view that there should be a 
Strategic Plan. They also supported the development of a corporate plan. PNA members proposed the 
Secretariat be tasked with developing a medium term corporate plan with activities in the intersessional 
period and report back to WCPFC15.   
495. 
Samoa supported the proposal from Palau on a medium term corporate plan that would clearly 
identify the Commissions core business. It also agreed with Japans views, that efforts should be 
concentrated on measures at this time.  
496. 
The Chair noted there was no wide support for the Commission to further develop a strategic 
plan. She confirmed with Members that they supported the Secretariat developing a medium term 
corporate plan to guide the work of the Commission.  
497. 
The Commission tasked the Secretariat to develop a medium-term corporate plan and 
report back to WCPFC15.  
13.2 
Research projects 
13.2.1 
Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction Project (Common Oceans) (ABNJ) 
498. 
The working paper WCPFC14-2017-29 Report to WCPFC on Progress of the Project 
Sustainable Management of Tuna Fisheries and Biodiversity Conservation in the ABNJ which 
provided an update on the ABNJ Common Oceans Tuna Project was taken as read.  
499. 
Mr Kim Stobberup from FAO expressed FAO’s appreciation for the frequent mention of the 
contribution of the ABNJ project to the work of the Commission. He acknowledged the project partners 
in the region and international partners for their achievements. He mentioned Dr Shelley Clarke’s 
relocation to FAO Rome to continue her work with the Project and he reiterated the project’s 
commitment to complete the programmed activities and provide the Secretariat with whatever support 
is needed to do so, including the direct assistance from Dr Clarke. The ABNJ Tuna Project has recently 
been through a favourable mid-term evaluation, indicating significant achievements in many areas. 
This creates a good opportunity to consider the possibility of a second phase of the project under GEF 
sponsorship. Informal consultation with current partners has shown interest and support to participate 
in the process of developing the concept for such a second phase. The focus on ABNJ is demonstrated 
it remains one of the three key areas of interest under the International Waters Programme of GEF. 
Addressing fisheries and in particular IUU fishing in the high seas will continue to be a high priority 
under the next cycle of GEF funding. In the coming months the project will initiate a consultative 
process with all the tuna RFMOs to ensure that the Tuna Project continues to serve the needs of the 
tuna management world.  
500. 
The European Union also thanked the FAO-ABNJ project and Dr Clarke. As the European 
Union funded WCPFC participation in this FAO-ABNJ tuna project, it was especially pleased to be 
84 
 
given reassurances that Dr Clarke would continue to assist the Commission supported by the project 
despite physically relocating to FAO offices in Rome.  
501. 
The Chair on behalf of the Commission thanked Dr Clarke for her continued hard work on 
this project and thanked the EU for its continued funding support to this project through this 
Commission  
502. 
The Commission noted the updates on the ABNJ project (WCPFC14-2017-29).  
13.2.2 
West Pacific East Asia (WPEA) Project 
503. 
The working paper WCPFC14-2017-28 Update on WPEA Project, was taken as read given 
time constraints.   
504. 
The Philippines thanked the Commission and the Secretariat for their support and assistance 
to this project. It also acknowledged the contribution by SPC-OFP. Through this project, the 
Philippines was able to build its capacity to participate more effectively in the work of the Commission. 
Their capacity was also built through participation in the three countries sub-regional workshop, SPC’s 
Tuna Data Workshop, and the Scientific Committee meeting; and its observer programme and port 
sampling activities have been improved.  
505. 
Indonesia thanked the Secretariat, the Commission and other bodies that supported the WPEA 
project. The project had enabled Indonesia to undertake port sampling programmes and they now have 
eight years of time series data from this project to contribute to various meetings and helped with the 
stock status work of this Commission. Indonesia now had a better understanding of the importance of 
managing their archipelagic waters and these project data helped them to develop their first harvest 
strategy for tuna in their waters, through strong collaboration with NGOs, industry and fisheries 
associations, and the Indonesian Government. Indonesia encouraged CCMs to read paper WCPFC14-
2017-DP26 Information Paper on Interim Harvest Strategies for Tropical Tuna in archipelagic waters 
of Indonesia, as it was the first information it had provided to the Commission and it intended to bring 
this information in further detail to the next SC meeting. Indonesia deeply appreciated the support of 
the project and looked forward to further strengthening its collaborations to develop responsible use 
of tuna resources not only in its waters but also in the WCPO.   
506. 
The Commission noted the updates on the WPEA project (WCPFC14-2017-28).  
13.3 
Election of officers 
507. 
The Commission made a number of appointments to Commission positions 
commencing in 2018: 
a. Mr Ueta Jr. Fasiili (Samoa) was appointed as SC Chair; 
b. Mr Laurence Edwards (RMI) was appointed as TCC Vice-Chair;  
c. Mr Wataru Tanoue (Japan) was appointed the new FAC Co-Chair on the first day of 
WCPFC14 to ensure the continuation of the co-chairing arrangement and the efficient 
progression of FAC work in the margins of the meeting; and  
d. Mr Bradley Philips (FSM) was appointed as FAD Management Options IWG Chair. 
 
85 
 
508. 
In support of other 2018 Intersessional Working Group activities, to be progressed 
electronically, the Commission confirmed the following:  
a. Mr Shingo Ota (Japan) would lead the IWG-Sharks; 
b. Mr Glen Joseph (RMI) would lead the Review of the Compliance Monitoring Scheme IWG 
(CMS IWG); 
c. Mr Tom Graham (USA) would lead the TCC-observer report and observer conduct IWG; 
and 
d. Ms Sarah Williams (New Zealand) would lead the south Pacific Albacore Roadmap virtual 
IWG. 
13.4 
Future meetings 
509. 
In 2018, the Commission agreed that:  
ER and EMWG would be held from Monday 6th to Tuesday 7th August 2018 Busan, Korea 
SC14 would be held from Wednesday 8th to Thursday 16th August 2018 in Busan, Korea;  
NC14 would likely be held in the first week of September in Japan, with the exact dates and 
venue to be confirmed; 
TCC14 would be held from Wednesday 26th September to Tuesday 2nd October 2018 in 
Majuro, Republic of Marshall Islands; 
FAD Management Options IWG would be held Wednesday 3rd October 2018 in Majuro, 
Republic of Marshall Islands; 
WCPFC15 would be held from Monday 3rd to Friday 7th December in Pohnpei, Federated 
States of Micronesia; and 
FAC12 would be held immediately prior to WCPFC15.   
 
510. 
The Commission agreed that $28,000 is to be transferred out of working capital fund 
to cover the additional costs of the 2018 agreed future meetings. 
AGENDA ITEM 14 – OTHER MATTERS 
511. 
No other matters were raised for consideration at WCPFC14.  
AGENDA ITEM 15 – SUMMARY REPORT OF THE WCPFC14 
512. 
The Chair outlined the process for adoption of the Summary Report for WCPFC14. The 
practice had been for an Outcomes Document containing agreed decision points to be circulated to the 
Commission within seven working days following the close of the annual session with the draft 
86 
 
Summary Report to be provided as soon as possible. CCMs would be given thirty working days after 
circulation of the draft Summary Report to provide any changes. The complete Summary Report would 
be finalised intersessionally and posted on the Commission website and representatives would be 
advised accordingly.  
AGENDA ITEM 16 – CLOSE OF THE MEETING  
513. 
The Chair thanked all participants and the Secretariat for their very hard work and 
engagement, not only at WCPFC14 but over the last year and a half to ensure the successful adoption 
of the bridging measure for tropical tunas.  Noting that the bridging measure was not the only outcome 
from this meeting, the Chair expressed that in her view the Commission had positioned itself to 
continue its good work into next year, and she expressed her congratulations to participants on the 
outcomes of their efforts and encouraged participants to look back on the meeting feeling satisfied 
with their hard work.  The Chair specifically thanked the meeting participants who were still present 
at the closing, and acknowledged that their presence and continued engagement at this late hour was a 
demonstration of their commitment to the Commission and its principles and objectives.  Finally, she 
wished the participants well in their travels back home, and confirmed that she looked forward to 
welcoming delegates to her home Pohnpei next year for WCPFC15.     
514. 
The meeting closed at 3.07am on Friday, 8 December 2017.  
