Commission for the Conservation and Management of  
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean 
 
Third Regular Session 
 
11–15 December 2006 
Apia, Samoa 
 
SUMMARY REPORT 
 
AGENDA ITEM 1 — OPENING OF MEETING 
 
1. 
The Third Regular Session of the Commission for the Conservation and Management of 
Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPFC3) took 
place from 11–15 December 2006 in Apia, Samoa. The session was opened by the Chair of 
the Commission, Mr Glenn Hurry (Australia).  
2. 
The following Members, Cooperating Non-members (CNMs) and Participating 
Territories (CCMs) attended: Australia, Canada, People’s Republic of China, Cook Islands, 
European Union (EU), France, Fiji, Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), French Polynesia, 
Indonesia, Japan, Kiribati, Korea, Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Caledonia, New Zealand, 
Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea (PNG), Philippines, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Chinese 
Taipei, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, United States of America (USA), Vanuatu, and Wallis and 
Futuna.  
3. 
Observers from the following inter-governmental organizations attended the session: 
Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA), Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC), 
Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP), Inter-American 
Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC), the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization 
(FAO) and the Agreement for the Conservation of Albatross and Petrels (ACAP).  
4. 
Observers from the following non-governmental organizations attended the session: 
Birdlife International, Blue Ocean Institute, Centre for Environmental Law and Community 
Rights Inc. (CELCOR), Earth Island Institute (EII), Organisation for the Promotion of 
Responsible Tuna Fisheries (OPRT), The Humane Society, World Tuna Purse Seine 
Organisation (WTPO), World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), and Greenpeace. 
1.1 Welcoming address 
5. 
A prayer was offered by Reverend Utufua Naseri.  
6. 
His Excellency Tuila’epa Sailele Malielegaoi, Prime Minster of Samoa, delivered a 
welcoming address (Attachment A).  
1.2 Chair’s opening statement 
7. 
The Chair presented an opening statement, thanking the Prime Minister for his 
welcoming address, and thanked Samoa's Ministries of Foreign Affairs, and Agriculture, 
Forestry and Fisheries, and the National University of Samoa for the excellent meeting 
preparations (Attachment B).  
2 
1.3 Adoption of the agenda 
8. 
The Commission adopted the agenda contained in WCPFC3-2006/02 Rev.1. 
AGENDA ITEM 2 — MEMBERSHIP 
2.1 Status of the Convention 
9. 
The depository for the Convention, New Zealand, presented WCPFC3-2006/07, 
summarizing the status of the Convention as of 10 November 2006. The Commission noted 
there has been no change to the status of the Convention since the last session of the 
Commission in December 2005 (WCPFC2). 
2.2 Applications for Cooperating Non-member status 
10. 
The Executive Director presented WCPFC3-2006/08, advising that during 2006, the 
Secretariat received applications for CNM status from Indonesia, USA, Belize and Senegal. 
The Executive Director also reported that the Secretariat received a letter from Panama (dated 
6 December 2006) seeking CNM status with the Commission. 
11. 
The USA reported that on 7 and 9 December 2006, the US Senate and House of 
Representatives, respectively, approved implementing legislation, enabling it to become a full 
member of the Commission. The USA noted that it expects to deposit its instrument of 
ratification in the first quarter of 2007. This ratification will also include the full participation 
of American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands in the 
work of the Commission in accordance with Article 43 of the Convention. 
12. 
The Chair thanked the USA and welcomed its imminent ratification of the Convention. 
13. 
Indonesia reported that it was undertaking internal processes to ratify the Convention 
but that this was a difficult and lengthy process due to ongoing amendments to the Indonesian 
constitution. Consequently, Indonesia could not confirm a likely date for eventual ratification 
and would request that its CNM status be renewed. Indonesia also reported on its efforts to 
comply with the provisions of the Convention, particularly with respect to the implementation 
of licensing fishing vessels, logbook system, vessel monitoring system, transshipment of fish, 
control of input on bigeye and yellowfin tuna fisheries, and incidental catch of seabirds and 
sea turtles.  
14. 
The Chair thanked Indonesia and looked forward to it becoming a full member of the 
Commission. 
15. 
The Commission renewed the CNM status of the USA and Indonesia. 
16. 
Belize presented its case for becoming a CNM of the Commission, noting that currently 
nine of its flag fishing vessels were operating in the Convention Area.  
17. 
The Commission noted that Belize has met the legal requirements in respect to the types 
of data to support its application for CNM status. However, Members expressed concern 
regarding the technical content of these data. Despite these concerns, some Members 
supported the application from Belize if specific conditions were applied. Following further 
discussions, the Commission could not achieve consensus and therefore could not approve 
Belize’s application for CNM status until these concerns were addressed.  
18. 
The Chair urged CCMs to submit their concerns regarding Belize’s application for 
CNM status by 28 February 2007, after which, the Secretariat would notify Belize of the 
3 
remaining data requirements that it would need to provide in order to have its application 
considered further. In his letter to Belize, the Executive Director was instructed to draw 
Belize’s attention to the concerns of the Commission with respect to current fishing capacity 
in the Convention Area and to seek clarification on the ownership and activities of Belize-
flagged vessels operating in Vietnam, Singapore and Chinese Taipei. 
19. 
The Commission agreed that Belize-flagged fishing vessels would not be deemed 
illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing vessels in the interim period pending 
WCPFC4’s consideration of its renewed application for CNM status.  
20. 
Senegal presented its case for becoming a CNM of the Commission. The Commission 
agreed that because Senegal has not met the Commission’s legal requirements with respect to 
all data relating to the operation of its fishing vessels, which is required by the Commission to 
support its application for CNM status, the Commission rejected Senegal’s application for 
CNM status. As a result, Senegalese vessels active in the WCPFC Convention Area may be 
considered IUU vessels. The Commission encouraged Senegal to re-submit a more 
comprehensive application, addressing all of the Commission's requirements to the next 
regular session of the Commission. The Executive Director was directed to write to Senegal 
providing guidance for a re-submission of Senegal’s application for CNM. 
21. 
Senegal considered that enough data had been provided to support its application for 
CNM status. In addition, Senegal noted that all of its vessels active in the Convention Area 
were registered with the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) Regional Register of 
Foreign Fishing Vessels (RREG). In response to a request for clarification from China, New 
Zealand — on behalf of FFA members — responded that several Senegalese vessels were on 
the FFA RREG and that they should be removed from that registry. The Executive Director 
was instructed to write to Senegal advising Senegal to remove all of its vessels from the 
Convention Area. Failure to comply with this request would result in the Commission further 
considering the status of these vessels in the WCPF Convention Area at its next Session. 
22. 
The Commission noted that the Executive Director had written to Panama advising it of 
the procedure for submitting an application for CNM status.    
2.3 Applications for observer status 
23. 
The Commission noted an information paper prepared by the Secretariat listing current 
observers to the Commission (WCPFC3-2006/09).  
24. 
The Commission accepted applications for observer status from: the Humane Society, 
Blue Ocean Institute, Earth Island Institute, and Centre for Environmental Law and 
Community Rights Inc. in PNG.  
25. 
Japan invited the Commission to consider the observer status of the Sea Turtle 
Restoration Project (STRP), noting that since WCPFC2, the STRP had been responsible for a 
series of press releases that Japan considered to be misrepresentative of its position with 
relation to the interaction between sea turtles and tuna fisheries in the Convention Area. Japan 
stated that it welcomed the participation of observers in the work of the Commission but only 
if that participation was constructive and contributed positively to the Commission’s work. 
Japan was of the view that STRP had not honoured this understanding, and requested that the 
Commission consider suspending STRP's observer status since STRP had not responded to the 
previous communication by the Executive Director conveying Japan's concern.  
26. 
The EU agreed on the need to remind the STRP about its privileges and obligations as 
an observer to the Commission. However, the EU does not support the idea that STRP, or any 
4 
other NGO that does not fully agree with the positions of the CCMs, be prevented from 
attending Commission meetings.  
27. 
The Chair referred to Article 36 of the Rules of Procedure on the participation of 
observers in the meetings of the Commission and its subsidiary bodies. The Chair emphasised 
that any action taken by the Commission that would affect the status of participation of STRP 
as an observer requires transparency in process and decision-making by consensus. Japan 
subsequently suggested that the Secretariat again contact the STRP, requesting the correction 
of its statements in earlier press releases. If STRP fails to reply or comply with this request, 
Japan recommended the temporary suspension of STRP's status as an observer.   
28. The Commission agreed that the Executive Director would write to STRP, expressing 
concern on the issued press releases. If there was no response from STRP, or if the 
Commission found the response as unsatisfactory, an appropriate course of action with respect 
to the participation of STRP in the work of the Commission would be discussed at WCPFC4. 
29.  A list of participants is presented in Attachment C. 
AGENDA ITEM 3 — MEMBER REPORTS 
3.1 Annual reports by CCMs 
30. In accordance with Articles 23 and 32 of the Convention, the Chair invited CCMs to 
provide reports on their progress in implementing the Convention and conservation and 
management measures and other decisions of the Commission. Articles 23 and 32 of the 
Convention also require reports to record implementation of any conservation and 
management measures or other decisions of the Commission. Verbal statements were made by 
the following CCMs:  
a.   Nauru on behalf of FFA members, 
b.   Papua New Guinea, 
c.   Tuvalu, 
d.   Tonga, 
e.   European Union, and 
f.   Chinese Taipei. 
31. Nauru, on behalf of FFA members, advised the session that while the experience and 
lessons of other regional fisheries management organizations (RFMOs) would be valuable 
during the early developmental stages of the WCPFC, FFA members were firmly of the view 
that the WCPFC has many unique characteristics that require special consideration and, in 
many cases, a new and innovative approach. FFA members suggested that it may be time for 
the Commission to begin thinking about institutional arrangements to support more focused 
consideration of management options and to begin taking into account economic issues 
associated with the management of the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPO) tuna 
fishery, as is provided for in the WCPF Convention. In conclusion, Nauru presented a list of 
priorities for the effective operationalization of the Convention.       
32. Written statements were provided by PNG, New Caledonia, Tuvalu and the USA. 
33. The Chair noted that six CCMs had yet to comply with the decision of WCPFC2 
regarding annual reports to the Commission. The Commission encouraged CCMs with 
outstanding reports to submit them to the Secretariat by 31 January 2007. The Commission 
5 
also urged all CCMs to fully comply with Part 1 and Part 2 reporting obligations during 2007, 
noting that a simplified template had been agreed on by the Commission for future use.   
3.2 Statements by observers 
34. The Chair invited observers to the Commission to make statements. Written statements 
were presented by ACAP, CELCOR, EII, IATTC and WTPO. Greenpeace presented a 
statement on behalf of Birdlife International, EII, WWF, Blue Ocean Institute and the Humane 
Society, which supported the implementation of precautionary measures for target tuna 
resources and bycatch species in the WCPF Convention Area. 
AGENDA ITEM 4 — AD HOC TASK GROUP-DATA 
35. The Chair introduced the Chair of the Ad Hoc Task Group-Data (AHTG-Data), Mr Kim 
Duckworth (New Zealand) to present the report of the AHTG-Data group.  
36. Mr Duckworth referred to WCPFC3-2006/11, which summarises the work of the AHTG-
Data group during 31 July–4 August 2006 in Manila, Philippines. Mr Duckworth recalled the 
work of the Statistics Specialist Working Group (ST-SWG) at the First Regular Session of the 
Scientific Committee (SC1) in Noumea, New Caledonia in August 2005. He noted that SC1 
had forwarded a recommendation from the ST-SWG to WCPFC2 in Pohnpei, Federated States 
of Micronesia, to establish the AHTG-Data to consider data types and data confidentiality, and 
to develop draft rules and procedures for the security and confidentiality of WCPFC data. He 
noted that advice concerning the meeting had been circulated in May 2006 and that all CCMs 
had been encouraged to participate. 
37. The AHTG-Data report to the Commission included advice and recommendations with 
regards to: 
a.   the types of information to be treated as confidential; 
b.   risk associated with the alteration, loss or unauthorized access to WCPFC data; 
c.   guiding principles required for the rules and procedures for access to and 
dissemination of data; 
d.   data security and data security standards; 
e.   further elaboration of an Information Security Policy for the Commission; 
f.   the need for a framework for access to non-public domain data by CCMs; 
g.   further consideration of historical data and the role of the International Scientific 
Committee for Tuna and Tuna-like Species in the North Pacific Ocean (ISC); 
and 
h.   draft Rules and Procedures for Access to and Dissemination of Data Compiled 
by the Commission. 
38. Several CCMs, including FFA members, supported the Commission’s adoption of the 
AHTG-Data Summary Report on the basis that it is a "living document" subject to refinement 
by the Scientific Committee (SC) and the Technical and Compliance Committee (TCC), as 
required. 
39. The IATTC requested that in future elaborations of the AHTG-Data Summary Report, 
the Commission consider the inclusion of a reference to cooperative data-sharing 
arrangements with other RFMOs. 
6 
40. In relation to the AHTG-Data Summary Report, the Commission: 
a.   adopted the report as a "living document", noting Japan’s reservations based on 
its written comments; 
b.   agreed that the report be considered by SC3 and TCC3 for possible refinement; 
and 
c.   agreed that the report, as refined by SC3 and TCC3, be further considered by 
WCPFC4.  
AGENDA ITEM 5 — SCIENCE ISSUES 
5.1 Report of the Second Regular Session of the Scientific Committee 
41. Dr Dae-Yeon Moon (Chair of the Scientific Committee, Korea) presented the summary 
outcomes of the Second Regular Session of the Scientific Committee (SC) held in Manila, 
Philippines, from 7–18 August 2006. Dr John Hampton (SPC, Scientific Services Provider) 
presented a summary of the SC’s deliberations on stock status.  
42. The SC addressed the following issues:  
a.   new or updated assessments of the status of bigeye tuna, yellowfin tuna, South 
Pacific albacore, southwest Pacific swordfish, and southwest Pacific striped 
marlin. The 2005 assessment of skipjack tuna was not revised; 
b.   estimates of sustainable catch and effort levels for bigeye and yellowfin tuna; 
c.   investigation of methods to mitigate the impact of fishing on seabirds, sea turtles, 
juvenile bigeye and yellowfin tuna, and bycatch fish species, particularly sharks; 
d.   data and information requirements of the SC, including data confidentiality and 
access issues, coverage levels required in scientific observer programmes and 
specific projects, such as the Indonesia and Philippines Data Collection Project 
(IPDCP) and the Regional Tuna Tagging Project; and 
e.   cooperation with other organizations. 
43. The Commission noted: 
a.   record high catches of skipjack and bigeye tuna in 2005. The total catch in the 
Convention Area was also the highest catch on record at 2.1 million metric 
tonnes;  
b.   the assessments for yellowfin and bigeye tuna indicated that for both, overfishing 
is occurring (fishing mortality is greater than the reference level FMSY) but they 
are not yet in an overfished state (biomass is greater than the reference level 
BMSY); 
c.   the impact of the yellowfin tuna fishery has been to reduce by 50 percent the 
biomass of yellowfin tuna. The Indonesian/Philippine domestic fishery probably 
has the greatest impact, particularly in the western equatorial region. The purse-
seine fishery has a lesser, but still substantial effect, particularly in the equatorial 
regions. The impact of the longline fishery on yellowfin tuna is relatively small; 
d.   the impact of the bigeye tuna fishery has been to reduce by 70 percent the 
biomass of bigeye tuna. Although fish aggregating device (FAD)-associated 
purse-seine catches have made up an increasing proportion of the fishery impact 
7 
on bigeye tuna biomass since the mid 1990s, and contributed to the increase in 
fishing mortality beyond the reference level FMSY from 1997 onwards, longline 
fishing continues to contribute more than half of the total impact on the stock; 
e.   uncertainty associated with some of the assessments, particularly southwest 
Pacific swordfish, South Pacific albacore, yellowfin tuna and southwest Pacific 
striped marlin. Some of the issues relating to data uncertainty, particularly data 
from Indonesia and the Philippines, have been resolved but further revisions are 
expected to result from the IPDCP; 
f.   After preliminary work presented to the SC in 2005, this was the first full stock 
assessment of southwest Pacific swordfish. While sensitivity analysis considered 
data for the entire southern region of the Convention Area, the base case 
assessment applied only to the southwestern part of the Convention Area (00–
500S, 1400E–1750W); 
g.   uncertainty with the South Pacific albacore data did not greatly affect the 
conclusions of the assessment that South Pacific albacore was currently being 
fished within sustainable limits; 
h.   IUU fishing continues to be a problem for some CCMs. Indonesia and Cook 
Islands continue to seek cooperation from other CCMs to eliminate illegal fishing 
in their waters; 
i.   conservation and management measure (CMM)-related catch statistics and their 
analyses on key tuna species should be provided in tabular form as well as a 
summary figure for the Commission’s information; and 
j.   the Convention’s management objectives, including the application of reference 
points, has not yet been considered by the Commission.  
5.2 Response to conservation and management measures  
44. In accordance with the requirement under CMM-2005-01, the Commission endorsed the 
following advice: 
a.   In order to keep bigeye biomass at BMSY, a reduction in fishing mortality of 25 
percent from the average levels during 2001–2004 would be required. Greater 
levels of reduction would be required to keep bigeye biomass above BMSY.  
b.   In order to keep yellowfin biomass at BMSY, a reduction in fishing mortality of 10 
percent from the average levels during 2001–2004 would be required. Greater 
levels of reduction would be required to keep yellowfin biomass above BMSY.  
c.   In response to the control of sets on FADs for the purse-seine fishery (CMM-
2005-01, paragraph 15), the Commission endorsed all recommendations on 
research into measures to reduce the bycatch of juvenile bigeye and yellowfin 
tuna (paragraphs 36–38, Executive Summary of the Scientific Committee Report).  
45. The Commission noted the SC’s advice on other target species: 
a.   The skipjack tuna stock is not overfished nor is overfishing occurring, and current 
catch levels are sustainable. 
b.   The South Pacific albacore stock is not overfished nor is overfishing occurring, 
and increases in yields should be possible. 
8 
c.   For swordfish in the southwestern Pacific, the assessment cannot determine with 
certainty whether the stock is overfished or whether overfishing is taking place, 
and most models predict declines in stock size at current levels of fishing 
mortality. There should be no increases in fishing mortality on this stock. 
d.   Striped marlin fishing mortality may be equal to or exceed FMSY and biomass may 
be at or below BMSY, and there should be no increase in fishing mortality on the 
stock. 
5.3 Advice and recommendations of the Second Regular Session of the Scientific 
Committee to the Commission 
46. The Commission established an informal working group to refine proposals submitted by 
CCMs in respect of conservation and management measures for sharks, seabirds and sea 
turtles. In relation to recommendations on other fish and non-fish bycatch (paragraphs 39–41, 
Executive Summary), the views of CCMs varied between those proposing immediate action to 
reduce incidental bycatch, to those who considered that the Commission’s immediate research 
priorities should be on target tuna resources.  
47. The Commission endorsed recommendations for: 
a.   further development of an Information Security Policy (paragraphs 51 and 52, 
Executive Summary). 
b.   the inclusion of the IPDCP in the core budget of the Commission, subject to 
budgetary implications (paragraph 53, Executive Summary). While the 
importance of the project was highlighted, there were views that data collection 
was the responsibility of each CCM, the budget for this project should be based 
on voluntary contributions, and that geographical coverage of this project should 
be clarified. 
c.   tagging initiatives (paragraph 54, Executive Summary). 
d.   cooperation with other organizations (paragraphs 55 and 56, Executive 
Summary). The  Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) was recommended as 
the first priority for the development of a memorandum of understanding. 
e.   the special requirements of developing states and participating territories 
(paragraph 57, Executive Summary). 
f.   the Strategic Research Plan 2007–2011 for the Scientific Committee and 2007 
Work Programme (paragraphs 58 and 59, Executive Summary), noting that 
careful consideration should be given to the frequency of assessment of key tuna 
species and evaluation of management options.  
g.   future operation of the SC (paragraph 62, Executive Summary). 
48. Following a presentation from China, the Commission decided to revise the 
recommended rules of procedure for the SC inter-sessionally, and to reconsider them at 
WCPFC4. Some Members expressed disappointment at this outcome given the amount of 
time and effort dedicated by some delegations in developing the draft presented to WCPFC3. 
49. Regarding the independent review of the Commission’s science structure and functions, 
Japan submitted a new proposal on the review process in relation to the composition of a 
steering committee, nomination of reviewers, costs, etc. The Commission, noting the need for 
the review to be cost effective and independent, requested the SC to re-examine the terms of 
9 
reference for the review of the Commission’s science structure and functions, and to report on 
the results of the review to WCPFC4. 
50. FFA members requested that future advice from the SC on management measures should 
include an analysis of the impacts of measures on the catches of all major tuna species.  
51. The Third Regular Session of the Scientific Committee (SC3) will be held from 13–24 
August 2007, in Hawaii, USA. 
5.4 Scientific Committee work programme for 2007 
52. The Commission endorsed the proposed work programme (Table 2 of the SC2 Summary 
Report) subject to budgetary considerations. In considering the provision of scientific services 
by SPC, the Commission noted that the management fee offered by SPC for 2007 was half of 
that normally charged for SPC services. The Commission expressed gratitude and appreciation 
to SPC for the quality of its science service.  
53. The EU and Australia noted that several CCMs have, over a number of years, provided 
independent funds to SPC to support tuna research, tuna fisheries data collection and stock 
assessment, and that the Commission benefits from this indirect funding. 
54. The Cook Islands, on behalf of FFA members, requested that future work of the SC 
assign a similar level of attention to the needs of small developing States as is given to other 
issues. There is a need for particular attention to be given to the multi-species nature of the 
WCPO tuna fishery and to begin work on an ecosystem approach to managing the fishery.  
55. The Commission noted the Summary Report of the Second Regular Session of the 
Scientific Committee.  
AGENDA ITEM 6 — NORTHERN COMMITTEE 
6.1 Report of the Second Regular Session of the Northern Committee 
56. Mr. Benjamin Tabios (Vice Chair of the Northern Committee, Philippines) presented the 
summary outcomes of the Second Regular Session of the Northern Committee (NC2) held in 
Tokyo, Japan from 11–13 September 2006 (WCPFC/Meeting Reports/2006/3). He informed 
the Commission of the discussion of reports of the sixth meeting of the ISC during NC2 and 
the principal outcomes of SC2 as they related to the NC. The NC recommended that the Cook 
Islands be accorded membership to the NC and this was endorsed by the Commission.  
6.2 Response to conservation and management measures 
57. Mr. Tabios presented the NC's response to requests for advice from WCPFC2, which 
included a review of the application of the CMM on North Pacific albacore and an 
examination of options for securing scientific advice for all tuna stocks of interest to the 
Commission.  
6.3 Advice and recommendations of the Second Regular Session of the Northern 
Committee to the Commission 
58. Mr. Tabios presented the recommendations and advice of the NC to the Commission, 
which included: 
a.   implementation of the CMM on North Pacific albacore to be continued with no 
amendment; 
10 
b.   inclusion of a provision — if the Commission agrees to adopt a measure on 
southern swordfish stocks — that will prevent adverse effects on northern 
swordfish stocks by preventing CCMs from re-locating their fishing effort for 
swordfish to the area north of 20ºN latitude in the Convention Area;  
c.   endorsement of memoranda of understanding that had been drafted for 
cooperation with the ISC and IATTC; 
d.   undertake measures on a voluntary basis, with respect to seabird bycatch 
mitigation, that take into account the best scientific evidence available for 
mitigating sea bird bycatch, until the Commission adopts mitigation measures for 
the Convention Area, including north of 20° north; 
e.   inclusion of striped marlin in the species to be covered by the work of the NC; 
and  
f.   revision of scientific data to the Commission to include Pacific bluefin tuna.  
59. Several FFA members expressed concerns about the role of the NC in recommending 
measures on North Pacific albacore applicable to areas south of 20ºN latitude. Marshall 
Islands, PNG, and the Federated States of Micronesia requested the NC to conduct wider 
consultations with coastal States if future recommended conservation and management 
measures of the Committee directly affect areas south of 20ºN latitude. 
60. Mr Tabios emphasized that the NC did not intend to expand its jurisdiction beyond its 
area of competence, but that it was merely recommending a CMM that may be applied to 
northern albacore found in the area between 20°N and the equator. It was also noted that the 
CMM for northern albacore was discussed during WCPFC2 and that all CCMs had actively 
participated in the adoption of the CMM, which provided for its application north of the 
equator. 
61. Several CCMs also expressed concerns about the adoption of seabird catch mitigation 
measures applicable north of 20ºN latitude and the compatibility of those measures with 
CMMs that apply to the entire Convention Area.  
62. New Zealand stated that the stock assessments presented to the SC were not supported by 
adequate details explaining the basis for the assessments, and that in future, the ISC should be 
encouraged to provide full details for all stock assessments to both the SC and NC.  
63. The Commission agreed that further studies needed to be conducted by the SC before any 
decision was made on the inclusion of striped marlin as a “northern stock” in accordance with 
the rules of procedure for the NC. The SC was requested to provide a recommendation on this 
matter to the Commission for its consideration at WCPFC4.  
64. The Chair reminded NC Members about Annex I of the rules of procedure for 
recommending CMMs for northern stocks.  
65. The Chair noted that the NC has yet to finalize its proposed rules of procedure.  
6.4 Northern Committee work programme for 2007 
66. In accordance with Article 12 of the Convention, Mr Tabios presented a draft work 
programme for the NC for 2007. This work programme was adopted by the Commission as 
part of the NC's report, noting the need for its further review at future sessions of the NC. The 
Commission noted that NC Members bear the costs of the NC's work and that such costs 
would be added as supplemental items to the Commission's budget. 
11 
67. The Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) referred to the proposed use of Japan Trust 
Funds to support a post within the WCPFC Secretariat. FSM accepted that Japan had a right to 
determine how its funds would be applied but requested that the Commission be given an 
opportunity to comment on the terms of reference for the post before it was established.   
68. The NC will hold its next meeting in Japan from 11–13 September 2007. 
69. The Commission noted the Summary Report of the Second Regular Session of the 
Northern Committee.  
AGENDA ITEM 7 — ADOPTION OF CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT 
MEASURES 
70. At the invitation of the Chair, FSM, on behalf of the Parties to the Nauru Agreement 
(PNA), gave a presentation to WCPFC3 on the Vessel Day Scheme (VDS). The VDS will 
come into effect on 1 December 2007 and will replace the current license allocation scheme 
and cap of 205 purse-seine vessels. A trial implementation will begin 1 December 2006 and 
will operate until 30 November 2007, after which full implementation will proceed. The VDS 
will control effort within the EEZs of the PNA. A total allowable effort (TAE) has been set at 
a level consistent with WCPFC Conservation and Management Measure 2005-01. 
71. Some CCMs noted their earlier opposition to the scheme due to concerns that the PNA 
may allocate an annual TAE across their EEZs, which may not be consistent with fluctuating 
migrations of tuna through the EEZs of the PNA. Being solely for domestic implementation, 
the TAE would not be applicable to non-PNA members. Other CCMs accepted the right of 
coastal States to develop arrangements for managing fisheries within their respective zones on 
the basis that those arrangements are consistent with measures adopted by the Commission. 
Some CCMs considered that if those measures are incorporated in CMMs adopted by the 
Commission, then the Commission can require those measures to be periodically reviewed.  
72. FFA members noted that at the time the VDS was agreed on, no other arrangements were 
in place throughout the Convention Area other than what was in operation within the EEZs of 
FFA members. 
73. The WCPFC3 thanked FSM for its presentation. 
7.1 Conservation and management measures 
Review of existing measures 
74. The Commission reviewed the following decisions: 
a.   Conservation and Management Measures for Bigeye and Yellowfin Tuna in the 
Western and Central Pacific Ocean (CMM-2005-01) ; 
b.   Conservation and Management Measures for South Pacific Albacore (CMM-
2005-02); 
c.   Conservation and Management Measures for North Pacific Albacore (CMM-
2005-03); 
d.   Resolution on the Reduction of Overcapacity (Resolution-2005-02); 
e.   Resolution on the Incidental Catch of Seabirds (Resolution-2005-01); 
f.   Resolution to Mitigate the Impact of Fishing for Highly Migratory Fish Species 
on Turtles (Resolution-2005-04).  
12 
Conservation and Management Measures for Bigeye and Yellowfin Tuna in the Western and 
Central Pacific Ocean 
75. Three proposals on the conservation and management of bigeye and yellowfin tuna 
submitted by FFA members (WCPFC-2006/DP01), Japan (WCPFC3-2006/DP20), and Korea 
(WCPFC-2006/DP26) were discussed by the Commission. Drawing on these proposals and 
comments from CCMs, the Chair prepared a consolidated draft CMM for yellowfin and 
bigeye tuna for consideration by the Commission. 
76. Some CCMs raised concerns about several provisions in the Chair’s draft, including the 
adoption of a VDS for the high seas areas in the Convention Area, a multiple use marine 
protected area for the high seas, implementation of temporary closures on the use of FADs in 
the high seas and in non-archipelagic waters, and catch reduction for longline fishing vessels. 
Several CCMs supported an urgent need to reduce fishing mortality of juvenile bigeye and 
yellowfin from fishing on FADs, and encouraged the Commission to adopt measures that are 
equitable and do not result in a disproportionate burden of conservation and management 
measures being carried by one CCM or group of CCMs. Several CCMs noted the importance 
of encouraging the purse-seine industry to develop fishing techniques that mitigate the catch 
of juvenile bigeye and yellowfin tuna when setting on FADs. 
77. Following considerable debate, the Commission adopted CMM-2006-01, Conservation 
and Management Measure for Bigeye and Yellowfin Tuna in the Western and Central Pacific 
Ocean as a Supplement to CMM-2005-01 (Attachment D).  
78. Some CCMs expressed concern that the Commission had not adopted a strong measure 
as recommended by the SC and that the responsibility for the lack of progress should be 
shared by all CCMs. PNG expressed disappointment that small island developing States 
appeared to be expected to carry a disproportionate burden of responsibility for conservation 
and management.   
Conservation and Management Measures for South Pacific Albacore 
79. As reported to SC2, a full stock assessment was not undertaken for South Pacific 
albacore in 2006, although the 2005 assessment was updated. SPC's Oceanic Fisheries 
Programme advised SC2 that current catch levels of South Pacific albacore appear to be 
sustainable and that an increase in fishing mortality and yields would be possible. However, it 
was emphasized that any significant increase in effort would probably reduce CPUE in Pacific 
Island countries’ longline fisheries to low levels with only moderate increases in yields.  
80. The Commission agreed to continue the application of Conservation and Management 
Measure-2005-02 for South Pacific Albacore, with no amendment.  
Conservation and Management Measures for North Pacific Albacore 
81. The NC recommended that the Commission continue the application of CMM-2005-03 
for North Pacific albacore, with no amendment. NC Members were also requested to submit 
information on the implementation of this CMM, particularly with respect to the effort-control 
and data submission provisions, for review by the SC and TCC.  
82. The Commission adopted the NC's recommendation to continue the application of CMM-
2005-03 for North Pacific albacore, with no amendment.    
Resolution on the Reduction of Overcapacity 
83. Tuvalu presented a draft proposal (WCPFC-2006/DP19) for an interpretative decision by 
the Commission in relation to the application of paragraph 2 of Resolution-2005-02. Tuvalu 
explained that since the adoption of Resolution-2005-02, some developed CCMs, in their 
13 
effort to implement the resolution and other similar measures of other RFMOs, have placed 
restrictions on the building and export of purse-seine vessels. These restrictions have directly 
inhibited the efforts of Tuvalu and the Marshall Islands in particular, and potentially other 
developing island State members of the Commission, to develop their domestic tuna 
industries. The statement by Tuvalu, introducing its proposal, is appended as Attachment E.  
84. Chinese Taipei explained its domestic policy with respect to the export of fishing vessels, 
which seeks to prevent the expansion of fishing capacity on a regional basis. The Commission 
noted that it is not within its jurisdiction to instruct members on how to implement their 
domestic legislation relating to the implementation of the Convention.  
85. The Commission acknowledged the need to ensure that the implementation of 
Resolution-2005-02 does not have an adverse impact on the legitimate rights and aspirations 
of developing island State members of the Commission. Some CCMs emphasized the need to 
ensure that there is also a balance between the economic development goals and aspirations of 
developing island State members, and the control of capacity and conservation and 
management of the stocks in the Convention Area. China drew attention to the provisions of 
paragraph 15 of CMM-2005-01 in relation to the preparation of a plan for the development of 
purse-seine skipjack fisheries. 
86. The Commission was not able to support the draft proposal submitted by Tuvalu as a 
CMM.  
87. FFA members expressed their serious disappointment that Resolution-2005-02, which 
they had endorsed in good faith, had not been implemented in accordance with the language 
and spirit of the resolution. A statement by the Marshall Islands in relation to this matter is 
appended as Attachment F. 
88. The Commission agreed to establish a group of eminent persons, drawn from 
Commission Members, to work with FFA members to examine how to practically implement 
Resolution-2005-02. The group would work to ensure that the legitimate aspirations of 
developing island State members to develop their domestic tuna fisheries are undertaken 
within the overall capacity limits of the tuna resources in the Convention Area.  
89. The USA alerted CCMs to a recently completed survey of longline and pole-and-line 
vessels operating in the Convention Area, and indicated a willingness to share this report with 
all CCMs and the Secretariat to progress discussions related to capacity for gear types other 
than purse seine. 
Resolution on the Incidental Catch of Seabirds 
90. New Zealand, on behalf of FFA members, presented a proposal for the adoption of a 
CMM to mitigate the impact of fishing for highly migratory fish stocks on seabirds 
(WCPFC3-2006/DP03 Rev.1). The proposal recommended voluntary and mandatory 
measures for longline vessels, such as side setting, night setting, the use of tori lines, weighted 
branch lines, blue-dyed bait, deep-setting line shooter, bait caster, and underwater setting 
chute.  
91. Following the discussion in plenary, during which CCMs expressed strong and divergent 
views on bycatch mitigation measures, the Chair established an informal working group for 
associated species in order to further develop a draft CMM for seabird and sea turtle 
mitigation, and to consider a measure for sharks for subsequent consideration by the 
Commission. The working group was chaired by the European Commission (EC).  
92. The EC subsequently tabled a draft compromise proposal (WCPFC3-2006/29 Rev.3) for 
consideration by the Commission.  
14 
93. As a result of the work undertaken in the working group, the Commission adopted the 
"Conservation and Management Measure to Mitigate the Impact of Fishing for Highly 
Migratory Fish Stocks on Seabirds" (Attachment G). Some CCMs expressed dissatisfaction 
that the Commission had not adopted a stronger measure as recommended by the SC.  
94. The Commission agreed on the need to review these measures and update them if 
required in future. 
Resolution to Mitigate the Impact of Fishing for Highly Migratory Fish Species on Turtles 
95. Resolution-2005-04 calls for action to mitigate the impact of interactions between sea 
turtles and fishing gear used in fishing for highly migratory fish species. The Resolution tasks 
the TCC with developing relevant strategies for further consideration by the Commission in 
2007.  
96. In 2006, the SC recommended that a flexible approach to sea turtle mitigation be adopted. 
CCMs recognized the need to compile existing information and to continue gathering more 
comprehensive data on sea turtle interactions in order to develop a more complete picture of 
the effectiveness of the various sea turtle bycatch mitigation strategies. This will provide the 
Commission with the necessary information to address interactions with sea turtles in fisheries 
covered by the Convention.  
97. The Commission endorsed the sea turtle research programme recommended by SC2, 
bearing in mind the availability of resources. The Commission noted ongoing research 
undertaken by some CCMs on the effectiveness of circle hooks and other measures in 
mitigating interactions with sea turtles. CCMs were encouraged to complete research on gear 
and methods to avoid or reduce interactions with sea turtles, particularly circle hooks, and to 
provide results to the Commission to support further deliberations on this issue in 2007. 
CCMs were encouraged to continue research and mitigation trials, particularly in conjunction 
with small island developing States. 
98. The Commission requested SC3 to review mitigation measures that, when applied, can 
substantially reduce sea turtle interactions in fisheries covered by the Convention while 
maintaining viable target species catch rates. WCPFC3 requested TCC3 to examine the 
mitigation measures compiled by SC3 and to develop technical specifications (definitions) for 
each measure, and to recommend these measures to the Commission. CCMs were urged to 
contribute to the work of the TCC3 by providing the Commission with technical specifications 
for sea turtle interaction mitigation methods or devices currently employed by their vessels in 
highly migratory species fisheries.  
99. The Commission will consider the adoption of specific sea turtle interaction mitigation 
measures at its annual session in 2007, based on the recommendations of SC3 and the 
technical specifications developed by TCC3. 
7.2 Consideration of new measures and other conservation requirements 
Conservation and Management Measure for Swordfish in the Southwest Pacific 
100. Australia introduced a proposal for a CMM for swordfish in the southwest Pacific 
(WCPFC3-2006/DP02 Rev.2). The proposal was based on the management advice of the SC, 
and promoted a precautionary approach with recommendations for no further increases in the 
fishing mortality of swordfish until stock status estimates become more certain. Australia 
emphasized that the draft CMM is applicable south of 20ºS of the Convention Area; however, 
Australia encouraged the NC to consider the development of a similar CMM in the 
Convention Area north of 20ºN for adoption by the Commission. 
15 
101. The EC, referring to delegation paper WCPFC3-2006/DP34, questioned the research on 
which the proposal submitted by Australia was based, noting that significant questions arose 
as a result of selective use of the geographic areas on which the assessment was based and the 
biological parameters for swordfish that were used. The EC also noted that its fleet in the 
southwest Pacific continued to report good catch rates, which implied that the target stock was 
not depleted as was suggested by the Australian and New Zealand research. 
102.  Australia responded that delegation paper WCPFC3-2006/DP34 dealt principally with a 
technical issue and that the issues were not raised by the EU or other CCMs during the 
Specialist Working Group reviews nor subsequently when the SC considered the issue. 
Australia remarked that the EU, in preparing its assessment, apparently did not consider the 
supporting documents that were reviewed by the SC (SC2-ME-WP3; SC2-ME-WP4) because 
many of the issues raised were covered by the documents, or were raised and resolved at the 
SC meeting. Australia and New Zealand tabled WCPFC3-2006/DP42 in response to the issues 
raised by the EC.   
103. The Cook Islands expressed concern about the rapid expansion during the last two years 
of some CCM fleets, which are targeting swordfish. The Cook Islands noted that small island 
developing States are critically reliant on limited fishery resources and that the rapid 
expansion of CCM fleets not located in the WCPO had the potential to threaten the fishery 
development aspirations of small island States.            
104. The Chair appointed a small informal working group to consolidate the views of CCMs 
on appropriate measures for swordfish. As a result of the work of the group and a joint 
proposal by FFA states and the EC, the Commission subsequently adopted "Conservation and 
Management Measure for Swordfish in the Southwest Pacific" (Attachment H). 
Conservation and Management Measure for Striped Marlin in the Southwest Pacific 
105. Australia introduced a proposal for a conservation and management measure for striped 
marlin in the southwest Pacific (WCPFC3-2006/DP08/Rev.1). The proposal also adopted the 
management advice of the SC and promoted a precautionary approach for no further increases 
in the fishing mortality of striped marlin until stock status estimates become more certain. 
Australia emphasized that the provisions of the proposed CMMs do not apply to coastal State 
CCMs south of 15°S of the Convention Area that have already taken, or continue to take, 
significant steps to address concerns over the status of striped marlin in the southwest Pacific 
region.  
106. The Commission adopted "Conservation and Management Measure for Striped Marlin in 
the Southwest Pacific" (Attachment I).  
107. Australia requested that the Summary Record reflect its concern at the exclusion of 
bycatch data reporting requirements from the measure, and requested that future sessions of 
the Commission keep this matter under review. 
Conservation and Management Measures for a Vessel Chartering Scheme  
108. Niue, on behalf of FFA members, presented a proposal for a CMM for a regional vessel 
chartering scheme (WCPFC3-2006/DP06 Rev.1). The proposed CMM sets out the conditions 
for the chartering scheme, information to be submitted by chartered vessels, and the rights and 
obligations of flag States to exercise effective control over chartered vessels.  
109. Noting the concerns expressed by some CCMs relating to the proposal, and suggestions 
for improvement of the proposed measure (including the need to take into account issues 
involving flag State and charter State responsibilities), the Commission agreed to refer the 
16 
draft CMM for a Regional Vessel Chartering Scheme to TCC3 for its consideration and 
advice.  
110. Japan reiterated its views regarding charter arrangements as long-term arrangements, and 
stated that it will resubmit its proposal (WCPFC3-2006/DP32) on vessel charter arrangement 
for consideration at TCC3, taking into account the comments of other members including the 
proposal tabled by FFA members (WCPFC-2006/DP06 Rev.1).  
Conservation and Management of Sharks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean 
111. Palau, on behalf of FFA members, presented a proposal for the adoption of a CMM for 
sharks caught in association with fisheries in the Convention Area (WCPFC3-2006/DP04). 
This document was subsequently revised to incorporate Japan’s comments (WCPFC3-
2006/DP28).  
112. The proposal aims to implement the FAO International Plan of Action for the 
Conservation and Management of Sharks, particularly by encouraging CCMs to adopt 
National Plans of Action and apply measures for the full utilization of sharks. Such measures 
pertain to the collection of data on sharks, retention, landing, transshipment and trade in shark 
fins, and the release of live sharks incidentally caught by tuna and tuna-like fisheries. 
113. In response to a question from the EU, SPC's Oceanic Fisheries Programme advised that 
current data holdings for shark fisheries in the WCPO are not comprehensive and that the 
available information is hard to consolidate. The EU, supported by Australia, proposed that all 
shark catch data, including shark bycatch data, be provided to the Commission as a mandatory 
requirement and that the Commission should identify current gaps in the provision of these 
data by CCMs.    
114. Australia informed the Commission of initiatives to establish conservation and 
management arrangements for sharks, such as those being promoted by the Convention on 
Migratory Species, and that these initiatives were appearing because of a perception that some 
RFMOs are not doing enough to responsibly manage shark resources. Such initiatives served 
as a motivator for the Commission to establish internationally acceptable arrangements for 
shark conservation and management in the WCPO.   
115. Following a discussion in plenary, during which CCMs expressed strong and divergent 
views on conservation and management arrangements for sharks, and further deliberation in 
the informal working group convened by the Chair for considering associated species, the 
Commission adopted "Conservation and Management Measure for Sharks in the Western and 
Central Pacific Ocean" (Attachment J), noting that the measure should be periodically 
reviewed by the Commission and refined as necessary. 
116. In a general statement, the USA understood that the Preparatory Conference had agreed 
that, because of the difficulty delimitating the western boundary of the Convention Area the 
Commission would describe the area of application of each CMMs, and the data required to 
support it, for each CCM as it is adopted. This was confirmed by the Chair.  
117.  FFA members expressed the view that the TCC should, as a matter of priority, begin to 
determine benchmarks and mechanisms to monitor and assess the implementation of CMMs 
adopted by the Commission. The fulfillment of the function of the TCC as set out in Article 
14(1) (a) should commence in 2007 and should be an ongoing priority task for the TCC. 
7.3 Allocation 
118. Dr David Agnew (Marine Resources Assessment Group Ltd., United Kingdom) 
presented a review of tuna resource allocation matters for the Commission's consideration in 
17 
developing a scheme for the allocation of WCPO tuna resources (WCPFC3-2006/15). The 
report was commissioned by WCPFC2, and reviews specific challenges that the Commission 
will encounter by addressing the issue of allocation, and describes options for allocation 
schemes that may be utilized to address these challenges.  
119. FSM, on behalf of FFA members, stated that the report provides a basis for further 
discussion on allocation, and reflects an appropriate balance of the interests of CCMs. 
However, FFA members expressed concern about the report’s treatment of central issues of 
allocation. FFA members indicated that the role of the Commission is to determine stock-wide 
effort and catch limits and to make allocations for the high seas with no major role in waters 
under national jurisdiction as that is subject to the sovereign rights of coastal states. FFA 
members believe that CCMs will need to think beyond the limited scope of the report, and 
suggested that the report be referred to the SC and TCC for discussion and review, with 
reports made to WCPFC4.  
120. The Commission noted New Zealand’s plans to submit a proposal to WCPFC4 for 
holding a workshop on allocation, to be held in New Zealand in 2008. 
121. Some CCMs, while noting the report’s utility regarding the allocation issue, stated that 
they were not in a position to negotiate the basic legal framework of management of highly 
migratory species in relation to allocation. They suggested that the Commission prioritize its 
work so that issues such as conservation and management and fishing capacity are addressed 
prior to the issue of allocation.  
122. The Commission: 
a.   agreed that written comments by CCMs on the allocation report should be 
provided  to the Executive Director by 31 August 2007 for collation and 
presentation to WCPFC4;  
b.   noted the possibility of an allocation workshop to be held in New Zealand in 
2008; and 
c.   agreed on the need to prioritize the issues before the Commission, including the 
allocation issue, to assist with strategic planning.  
7.4 Proposal for a system of temporary purse-seine closures 
123. The Executive Director presented WCPFC3-2006/16. This paper, prepared with the 
assistance of the Commission’s Scientific Services Provider, was designed to support 
discussion on temporary purse-seine closures in the Convention Area, as called for in 
paragraph 11 of CMM 2005-01. The paper examines options for reducing fishing mortality on 
bigeye and yellowfin tuna in the WCPO, including spatial and temporal closures of the most 
significant purse-seine fishing grounds in the Convention Area to purse-seine fishing, 
prohibitions of fishing on associated sets in the third or fourth quarters of the year, and a quota 
on bigeye longline catch on the high seas. While many of the scenarios meet the FMSY 
management objective for yellowfin tuna, the only scenario that met the same objective for 
bigeye tuna required either some reduction in longline catches to supplement the purse-seine 
measures, or a 75 percent reduction in purse-seine catches. Many Members welcomed this 
analysis and thanked the Secretariat for the comprehensive paper.  
124. FFA members advised that they could not accept the use of closures as the primary 
instrument for long-term tuna management, as they sustain overcapacity, contribute to 
economic inefficiency, undermine coastal States' rights, and disproportionately disadvantage 
small island States. However, FFA members considered that there may be a role for closures 
aimed at reducing bycatch, or as an interim measure while other measures are developed. 
18 
Although paragraph 11 of CMM 2005-01 calls for any closure measure considered by the 
Commission to be consistent with the system in operation in the eastern Pacific Ocean, FFA 
members did not regard the use of closures in the IATTC as an appropriate model for use in 
the WCPFC.  
125. The Philippines stated that measures that restrict coastal States (e.g. closures) should be 
avoided.  
126. Several CCMs supported the closure of high seas enclaves to all purse-seine fishing 
because creating such a closure would assist in deterring IUU activities of fishers who often 
use such areas as refuges from enforcement activities. The closure of the high seas from purse-
seine fishing might eventually lead to the creation of high seas protected areas.  
127. Indonesia expressed reservations to committing to closures as the analysis was based on 
data from the Sulawesi Sea and archipelagic waters, which Indonesia stated are not within the 
Convention Area. The Commission recalled discussions during the Preparatory Conference 
regarding the western boundary for the Convention Area. It noted that the region was subject 
to numerous claims and counter-claims over maritime areas and that this made it extremely 
difficult to define the western limit for the Convention Area. The Commission noted the 
importance of the western region as an area supporting substantial fisheries that target tuna 
resources shared with CCMs. Some CCMs proposed that it was time to take action that will 
enable the Commission to agree on a western boundary.   
128. Several CCMs recommended that the analysis and impacts of the options for temporary 
purse-seine closures be reviewed by the SC. At the same time, the SC should review reference 
points and the appropriateness of MSY-based management in a multi-species context, for 
application to WCPO tuna fisheries. 
129.  FFA members noted that the reason that they did not support a FAD closure this year 
was because of concern over the possible severe impacts that a FAD closure could have on 
some FFA members, and the lack of information to assess those impacts.  
130. New Zealand emphasized that research on the reduction of bycatch from FADs should 
continue and that closures should not relate to un-associated purse-seine sets or to areas where 
there is no significant bycatch of juvenile bigeye and yellowfin tuna.  
131. Japan raised several questions concerning the geographic areas of principal concern with 
respect to the greatest fishery impact on the bigeye stock, the impact of a limited data set from 
the Indonesian region, uncertainty associated with the impact of the purse-seine fishery on the 
bigeye stock (particularly since 1995), and the basis for the assessed significant impact of the 
longline fishery on the bigeye stock.  
132. SPC's Oceanic Fisheries Programme advised that the greatest fishery impact on the 
bigeye stock occurs in the equatorial zone in the western region. Although data from the 
western region for the Indonesian and Philippine fisheries are poor, the situation is improving 
and this is at least partly due to the efforts of the Indonesian Philippine Data Collection Project 
(IPDCP). However, historical data from fisheries in this area are generally poor. Separation of 
yellowfin and bigeye in the catch data since 2004 has resulted in significant changes in the 
catch estimates for bigeye and yellowfin from Indonesia; however, as this information was 
received after the 2005 assessments had been completed, they were yet to be incorporated in 
the assessments. Considerably more work is required to improve fishery data for Indonesia, 
particularly prior to 2004. Other issues contributing to uncertainties include the fact that 
bigeye has not consistently been reported as a separate species from yellowfin, particularly in 
purse-seine logsheet data. This was an important matter that needed to be addressed through 
activities such as port sampling and observer programmes.  
19 
133. Japan stated that the inclusion of options considering longline restrictions, and a review 
of the effectiveness of CMM-2005-01, were outside of the mandate of the review. Japan 
requested that the paper be recalled due to its concerns that the paper was unintentionally 
biased. Japan, Korea and Chinese Taipei rejected the option for reducing longline catch, with 
Chinese Taipei noting that it had already reduced its WCPO bigeye longline fleet by 35 
vessels during the last two years. 
134. Chinese Taipei, supported by several CCMs, stated that measures should strive for 
compatibility between high seas and waters under national jurisdiction in accordance with 
Article 8 of the Convention.  
135. The USA observed that the analysis had shown that a closure of high seas waters was not 
sufficient for achieving the reduction in mortality recommended by the SC and that larger area 
closures, or closures targeting hotspots, should also be considered as a management option. 
The USA identified four elements to be incorporated in any closure measure:  
 
a. reference to the 1999 Resolution on overcapacity,  
 
b. the area of application should include the entire Convention Area,  
 
c. a limitation on FADs, and  
 
d. some measure to reduce longline effort and catch.  
136. The Commission noted the paper and its utility in informing the discussions on Agenda 
Item 7.1(1). 
AGENDA ITEM 8 — TECHNICAL AND COMPLIANCE ISSUES 
8.1 Report of the Second Regular Session of the Technical and Compliance Committee 
137. Mr Apolosi Turaganivalu (Chair of the Technical and Compliance Committee, Fiji) 
presented the summary outcomes of the Second Regular Session of the Technical and 
Compliance Committee (TCC2) held in Brisbane, Australia from 28 September–3 October 
2006. He reported that TCC2 agreed that its three main issues at present are the Commission’s 
vessel monitoring system (VMS), Regional Observer Programme, and procedures for high 
seas boarding and inspection in the Convention Area. TCC2 also identified several elements 
as requiring considerable work: bycatch mitigation, review of Commission decisions relating 
to the functions of the TCC, mechanisms to monitor compliance and the development of 
sanctions in the event of non-compliance, transshipment, IUU vessel lists, port State measures, 
and a catch and/or statistical documentation scheme.  
138. FFA members noted the need for an integrated and comprehensive framework for 
monitoring, control, surveillance and enforcement to assist the Commission in ensuring the 
effective conservation and long-term sustainable use of highly migratory fish stocks in the 
Convention Area, in accordance with the WCPF Convention. Such a framework is also needed 
to address problems associated with illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing in the 
Convention Area, both within and beyond areas under national jurisdiction.  
139. Other CCMs noted the need for: 
a.  a WCPFC Record of Fishing Vessels that records information on which vessels 
are "active" in the Convention Area,  
b.  non-CCMs to be encouraged to apply for Cooperating Non-member status,  
c.  a mechanism to identify IUU vessels, and 
20 
d.  speedy implementation of the Regional Observer Programme.  
140. In relation to the format of Part 2 of the Annual Report, the Commission endorsed 
TCC2’s recommendations that: 
a. the revised template for Part 2 of the Annual Report (Attachment K) be adopted 
for future reports; 
b. Part 2 of the Annual Report be completed on a calendar year basis and submitted 
to the Secretariat by 31 July each year; 
c. the Commission invite the SC to review Part 1 of the Annual Report in light of 
its relationship with Part 2, including its consistencies (such as reporting periods 
and submission times); and 
d.  the Secretariat be tasked with preparing guidelines, including minimum 
standards, for the completion of Part 2 of the Annual Report. These guidelines 
should be focused to ensure that a minimum level of consistency is achieved 
without being overly prescriptive.  
141. In relation to a process for monitoring, reviewing and reporting on compliance with the 
Convention and the decisions of the Commission, including a proposed process for 
determining appropriate action in the event of non-compliance, the Commission endorsed 
TCC2’s recommendation that the revised Figure 1 (process and structure for monitoring 
compliance by CCMs and the application by non-CCM fishing vessels of conservation and 
management measures, Attachment L) be adopted as the Commission’s procedures for 
monitoring and assessing compliance by CCM fishing vessels with the Commission’s CMMs. 
Tonga, on behalf of FFA members, noted that future work for the TCC will be to develop 
rules and procedures for developing sanctions and mechanisms for applying such sanctions.  
8.2 Response to Conservation and Management Measures 
142. Mr Turaganivalu presented TCC2’s response to requests for advice from the Commission 
on technical matters associated with the implementation of existing CMMs, namely 
authorization to fish, Commission VMS, Regional Observer Programme, High Seas Boarding 
and Inspection Procedures, port State measures, transshipment monitoring, charter 
arrangements scheme, options for catch and trade documentation with a focus on bigeye tuna, 
and IUU vessel lists.  
143. While the issue of authorization to fish focused on the application of CMM-2004-01 
whereby carrier and bunker vessels flagged to non-CCMs cannot be licensed by CCMs, the 
Commission agreed with the TCC2 recommendation that strict regulations be placed on 
identified carriers and bunkers flagged to non-CCMs operating in the Convention Area during 
a one-year phase-out period.  
144. The Commission agreed that the following regulations shall be applied to such carriers 
and bunkers during that one-year period: 
a. only bunkers and carriers identified to the Commission by CCMs can operate in 
the Convention Area; 
b. the Secretariat shall maintain a temporary register of carriers and bunkers 
identified by the Commission to whom the exemption from paragraph A(1)(c) of 
the CMM-2004-01 shall apply; 
c. these identified carriers and bunkers shall comply with all other CMMs adopted 
by the Commission; 
21 
d.  additional carriers and bunkers may be added to this temporary register during 
the one-year period. Any further vessels that are added shall also be subject to 
the above regulations; 
e.  vessels identified as engaged in IUU activities by other RFMOs cannot be 
entered on the temporary register; and 
f.  taking into account concerns that some developed CCMs may be using open 
registries to circumvent conservation and management measures and thereby 
expand capacity, the TCC shall further consider issues surrounding beneficial 
ownership and control of carriers and bunkers listed on the temporary register. 
145. On the issue of the Commission VMS, the Commission endorsed TCC2’s advice and 
recommendations that the Commission should: 
a.  develop a stand-alone VMS with the added capability of accepting VMS data 
forwarded from the FFA VMS. Vessels operating on the high seas in the 
Convention Area, and which are required to report VMS data to the Commission, 
will have the option to report those data via the FFA VMS; and 
b.  adopt draft minimum automatic location communicator (ALC) standards. 
146. The Commission considered a draft CMM on the Commission VMS (WCPFC3-2006/28) 
prepared by the Secretariat, which includes draft minimum ALC standards as an annex.  
147. Canada, as Chair of the small group of CCMs that met on this issue, tabled a revised draft 
CMM on the Commission VMS (WCPFC3-2006/30 Rev.2) to cater for the strong and 
divergent views on the timing of implementation and the area of coverage.   
148. The Commission adopted this Conservation and Management Measure for the 
Commission VMS (Attachment M).     
149. On the issue of the Regional Observer Programme (ROP), the Commission endorsed 
TCC2’s recommendations that: 
a. an inter-sessional working group (IWG-ROP) be established to expedite further 
development of the ROP, in conjunction with the employment of an Observer 
Programme Coordinator (OPC) by the Secretariat; and 
b.  the Commission task TCC3 with developing a Conservation and Management 
Measure for the establishment of the ROP.  
150. A proposal developed by FFA members in consultation with other CCMs — entitled 
"Conservation and Management Measure for the Regional Observer Programme" (WCPFC3-
2006/DP5, Rev.1) — to advance action on the issue of the ROP was tabled for adoption. The 
Commission adopted this proposal (Attachment N), noting that the proposed IWG-ROP 
should be convened as early as practical in 2007.  
151. On the issue of high seas boarding and inspection, the Philippines noted that the draft 
prescribes the use of force in cases of failure to allow boarding of inspectors. The Philippines 
maintained that the remedial action for obstructing inspectors to execute their duties should 
not be the use of force but that which is similar to the refusal to allow boarding of inspectors 
as provided for in paragraphs 25 and 26 of the procedure. The Philippines also sought 
clarification on the use of the term "serious violations", which might imply that there exist less 
serious violations. The Philippines noted the need for clarification on what violations under 
paragraph 36 of the procedures would graduate into "serious violations". 
22 
152. The EU stated that both it and its member states shall refrain from the threat or use of 
force, in accordance with the general principles of international law, the United Nations 
Charter and the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. In addition, the EU and its 
member States underline that the use of force, as referred to in article 27 and 28, constitutes an 
exceptional measure that must be based upon strict compliance with the principle of 
proportionality, and that any abuse thereof shall imply the international liability of the 
inspecting State. Any case of non-compliance shall be resolved by peaceful means and in 
accordance with the applicable dispute settlement procedures. 
153. Korea stated that boarding and inspection on the high seas should primarily be targeted at 
ensuring and promoting compliance with CMMs in force and with the applicable rules of 
international law. It also believes that boarding and inspection should not interfere unduly 
with normal and lawful fishing activities, nor prejudice the safety of the fishing vessel and its 
crew. As such, Korea emphasized that boarding and inspection should be carried out in a safe 
and efficient manner where there are clear or reasonable grounds to suspect that the target 
vessel is engaged in IUU fishing activities.  
154. China noted the need for more detailed information on the implementation of the 
procedures, (e.g. advice to fishermen of their obligations, and of the obligations of flag States 
and inspecting States under these procedures). 
155. The Commission requested that the Executive Director begin developing the information 
necessary for the implementation of the Boarding and Inspection Procedures as provided for in 
paragraphs 11 through 18 and paragraph 20 of the Procedures, and agreed that boarding and 
inspection operations pursuant to the procedures would be authorized to begin 60 days after 
the circulation to CCMs by the Executive Director of the register of authorized inspection 
vessels in accordance with paragraph 17. In particular, WCPFC3 requested the Executive 
Director, in consultation with CCMs, to make arrangements for the design of the WCPFC 
Inspection Flag (paragraph 18), the approved identity card (paragraph 19), and the preparation 
of the multi-language questionnaire (paragraph 21).  
156. The Commission adopted the "Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission High 
Seas Boarding and Inspection Procedures" (Attachment O).  
157. In relation to port State measures, the Commission endorsed TCC2’s request that all 
CCMs provide outstanding information on existing port State and/or port inspection schemes 
to the Secretariat by 1 February 2007 to allow the Secretariat to undertake a gaps analysis for 
existing measures relative to the FAO Guidelines and to develop draft harmonized port State 
standards to be discussed at TCC3.  
158.  New Zealand, on behalf of FFA members, stressed that the harmonized port State 
standards to be developed must not undermine a port State’s sovereignty, and that they should 
only seek to set out minimum standards to be adopted in port. Such standards would not 
preclude a CCM from adopting more stringent national measures. In essence, the 
Commission’s scheme would become a code for WCPFC port States, ensuring that 
harmonized and consistent standards are being utilized within the WCPFC. Strengthened port 
State measures will seriously hinder those who seek to engage in IUU fishing in the WCPF 
Convention Area, both in areas under national jurisdiction and on the high seas.  
159. On the issue of transshipment, the Commission: 
a.  agreed that interested CCMs collaborate with the Secretariat to prepare a draft 
proposal on transshipment for consideration at TCC3; and 
23 
b.  endorsed TCC2’s recommendation to extend, for a further 12 months, a 12-
month exemption to the Philippines and FFA members regarding existing at-sea 
transshipment activities until transshipment guidelines are adopted at WCPFC4.  
160.  Palau, on behalf of FFA members, stated that, in accordance with Article 29(3) of the 
Convention, the focus of future efforts with respect to the development of transshipment 
procedures should be verification; that is, obtaining and verifying data on the quantity and 
species transshipped, both in port and at sea, and verifying when transshipment has been 
completed. 
161.  In relation to IUU vessel lists, a proposal developed by the EU, with the assistance of 
other CCMs, was tabled for adoption. It is entitled "Proposal for a Conservation and 
Management Measure to establish a list of vessels presumed to have carried out illegal, 
unreported and unregulated fishing activities in the western and central Pacific Ocean" 
(WCPFC3-2006/DP14 Rev.2).  
162. The US stated its desire to ensure that the flag state of a vessel charged with violations be 
able to provide input to the process prior to any decision to place the vessel on an IUU list. It 
further stated that these provisions should amended as needed, a view shared by other CCMs.  
163. Following clarification to a query from FFA members to ensure any measure adopted by 
the Commission is consistent with the International Plan of Action (IPoA) to Combat IUU 
Fishing, the Commission adopted the "Conservation and Management Measure to Establish a 
List of Vessels Presumed to have Carried Out Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing in 
the Western and Central Pacific Ocean" (Attachment P).  
164.  FFA States presented a proposal to the Commission to adopt a Catch Documentation 
Scheme (CDS) (WCPFC3-2006/DP07 Rev.1). The EC subsequently further elaborated this 
proposal (WCPFC3-2006/DP33) and Japan presented a proposal for the Commission to 
consider the adoption of a Statistical Document Program (SDP) (WCPFC3-2006/DP17). On 
the issue of options for a documentation scheme covering all catch, as called for at WCPFC2, 
the Chair noted that although there was no consensus among CCMs for a CDS, there was a 
general feeling that times have moved on and that statistical information schemes had proven 
to be insufficient in covering all areas of concern. Japan, supported by some CCMs, did not 
support this view stating that the WCPFC is the only RFMO without an SDP for bigeye tuna 
and that an SDP was critical for the effective implementation of other compliance measures 
such as the IUU List. Japan also stated that it believed that a SDP would be less onerous than a 
complicated CDS that could prove difficult to implement for many CCMs. Other CCMs were 
of the opinion that a catch document scheme was necessary to ensure the recording of all fish 
caught and traded. 
165.  The Commission agreed that interested CCMs would continue their dialogue on this 
matter inter-sessionally and that the matter would be taken up again at the next meeting of the 
TCC for subsequent consideration by WCPFC4. 
8.3 Advice and recommendations from the Second Regular Session of the Technical and 
Compliance Committee to the Commission 
166. Mr Turaganivalu presented advice and recommendations from TCC2 on issues associated 
with:  
a. catch mitigation measures for juvenile bigeye and yellowfin tuna taken around 
FADs (CMM-2005-01, para. 2, 11, 13 and 15); 
24 
b. mitigation measures for the incidental catch of seabirds (Resolution-2005-01, 
para.4); and 
c. the use of circle hook gear technology in longline fisheries as part of turtle 
bycatch mitigation measures (Resolution-2005-01, para.6 and 12).  
167. The Commission took into account the advice and recommendations of TCC2 in the 
formulation of the decisions of WCPFC3 on these issues.  
8.4 Technical and Compliance Committee work programme for 2007 
168. In accordance with Article 14 of the Convention, Mr Turaganivalu presented a draft work 
programme and budget for 2007 (including an indicative budget for 2008) for the TCC for 
consideration in the formulation of the Commission’s 2007 work programme and budget. 
169.  Niue, on behalf of FFA members, proposed that the TCC should be requested to prepare 
a more detailed five-year work plan, setting out a timeline for completion of key tasks in the 
Committee’s work programme. Such a work plan should accompany future budgets.  
170. The Commission noted that the Third Regular Session of the TCC will convene from 27 
September–2 October 2007 in Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia.  
171. The Commission noted the report of the Second Regular Session of the Technical and 
Compliance Committee. 
172. On behalf of the Commission, the Chair thanked Mr Turaganivalu for his excellent work 
as TCC Chair for the past two years.  
AGENDA ITEM 9 — ANNUAL REPORT ON THE WORK OF THE COMMISSION 
173. In accordance with Rule of Procedure 13, the Executive Director provided his Annual 
Report on the work of the Commission for 2006 in WCPFC3-2006/10. During 2006 the work 
of the Commission included monitoring progress with implementation of Conservation and 
Management Measures and Resolutions adopted at WCPFC2, implementing the programme 
of work approved at WCPFC2, convening the Second Regular Sessions of the Commission’s 
subsidiary bodies, engagement and consultation with other organisations, and establishing 
logistic and administrative support functions at the office of the Secretariat in Pohnpei, 
Federated States of Micronesia. 
174. The Commission noted the Executive Director’s Annual Report on the work of the 
Commission in 2006. 
AGENDA ITEM 10 — ADMINISTRATIVE ISSUES 
175.  Following an overview of papers WCPFC3-2006/17–22 and WCPFC3-2006/26 by the 
Secretariat, the Commission deferred plenary discussion of this agenda item pending 
consideration of agenda items 5.4; 8.4; 10.1; 10.2; 10.3; 10.4; and 13 by an Ad-Hoc Working 
Group on Finance and Administration. Mr Tapusalaia Terry Toomata of Samoa and Mr Jae 
Sung Lee of Korea were appointed joint chairs of this working group. 
176. The Ad-hoc Working Group’s summary report and recommendations were presented to 
the Commission by the co-chairs (Attachment Q).  
177.  In considering the Ad-hoc Working Group’s report, concern was expressed by some 
CCMs about the use of part of the Working Capital Fund to finance a proportion of the core 
budget. Canada, supported by several CCMs, requested that in future cases where a CCM has 
25 
a concern about a proposed budget, and in order to facilitate the work of the Finance and 
Administration Committee, 30 days notice should be given to the Secretariat regarding this 
concern.  
178.  French Polynesia indicated that it may be able to make a voluntary contribution to the 
2007 budget. 
179.  The EU stated that the budget means nothing if CCMs do not pay their contributions and 
urged CCMs to fulfill this obligation. 
180.  France requested that in the future, consideration be given to adjusting its assessed 
contributions to take into account its membership in two RFMOs with overlapping areas of 
application.  
181. The Commission adopted the recommendations contained in the summary report of the 
Ad-hoc Working Group to the Commission and a budget of USD 3,006,258 was agreed on for 
2007. Among those recommendations was that the Commission establish a standing Finance 
and Administration Committee to meet at the annual session to provide advice and 
recommendations to the Commission on matters related to the budget, finance and 
administration of the Commission. The 2007 budget, 2008 indicative budget, financing table 
and the 2007 contributions table are respectively set out in Annexes I, II and III of Attachment 
Q.  
182.   While it did not have an opportunity to consider it in detail, the Commission noted the 
Chair’s Draft Programme of Work/Conservation Measures and Strategies (WCPFC3-
2006/IP09) as a reference for future discussion regarding a strategy for prioritizing the work of 
the Commission for the period 2007–2011 (Attachment R). A medium to long-term strategic 
plan for the progressive development and implementation of the Commission’s work required 
further elaboration with input from the Commission’s three subsidiary bodies. The Secretariat 
was tasked with progressing this during 2007 together with the further development of a 
business plan to guide the role of Secretariat.     
10.1 Venue and dates for next meeting 
183. The Third Regular Session of the Scientific Committee will meet from 13–24 August 
2007 at Honolulu, Hawaii. The Third Regular Session of the Northern Committee will meet 
from 11 to 13 September at Tokyo, Japan. The Third Regular Session of the Technical and 
Compliance Committee will meet from 27 September–3 October 2007 in Pohnpei, Federated 
States of Micronesia. The Fourth Regular Session of the Commission will take place from 3–7 
December 2007 in Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia.  
AGENDA ITEM 11 — SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS OF DEVELOPING STATES 
184. Following clarification several queries from Japan concerning the application of the 
Special Requirements Fund to the private sector, WCPFC3 adopted guidelines for capacity 
building among developing States using the Special Requirements Fund that had been 
prepared by the Secretariat for consideration at WCPFC2 and subsequently refined by FFA 
members during 2006 (WCPFC3-2006/DP22 Rev.1). 
AGENDA ITEM 12 — COOPERATION WITH OTHER ORGANIZATIONS 
185. The Executive Director presented WCPFC-2006/25, which describes progress during 
2006 in establishing and maintaining relationships with other RFMOs and regional 
organizations, particularly those with related objectives and which can contribute to the 
26 
attainment of the Convention’s objectives. As part this presentation, the Executive Director 
announced that the MOU between the WCPFC and IATTC was signed on 15 December 2006, 
that the arrangement with SPC's Oceanic Fisheries Programme was being implemented 
effectively, and that additional work would be required in 2007 to initiate new formal 
arrangements with the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission, the Commission for the Conservation 
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment 
Programme and the Agreement for the Conservation of Albatross and Petrels.  
186. France noted the importance of formalizing the arrangement with IATTC as French 
Polynesia is a member of both the WCPFC and IATTC and its territorial waters are in the 
Convention Area of both organizations. 
187. The Commission noted the Executive Director’s report on cooperation with other 
organizations and endorsed the signing of the MoU with the International Scientific 
Committee for Tuna and Tuna-like Species in the North Pacific Ocean (ISC).  
AGENDA ITEM 13 — WORK PROGRAMME AND BUDGET FOR 2007 AND 
INDICATIVE WORK PROGRAMME AND BUDGET FOR 2008 
188. This item was dealt with concurrently with Agenda Item 10. 
AGENDA ITEM 14 — ELECTION OF OFFICERS 
189. The Executive Director chaired a session to consider nominations for the positions of 
WCPFC Chair, WCPFC Vice Chair, TCC Chair, TCC Vice Chair and SC Vice Chair. 
190. The Commission elected the following as WCPFC officers: 
a.   WCPFC Chair – Mr Glenn Hurry (Australia) 
b.  WCPFC Vice Chair – Mr Liu Xiaobing (China) 
c.   TCC Chair – Mr Feleti Teo (Tuvalu) 
d.   TCC Vice Chair – Mr Wendell Sanford (Canada) 
191.  Because no suitable candidate for the position of SC Vice Chair was available, New 
Zealand stated that Dr Shelton Harley could continue to serve in this role on the understanding 
that a suitable candidate would be available in the coming months. This offer was gratefully 
received by the Commission.   
AGENDA ITEM 15 — OTHER MATTERS 
15.1 Joint meeting of tuna RFMOs 
192. Japan provided details of a meeting of tuna RFMOs scheduled to take place in Kobe, 
Japan from 22–26 January 2007.  
193. Vanuatu, on behalf of FFA members, thanked Japan for making available funding to 
support the participation at this meeting of Pacific Island States. FFA members proposed the 
following areas for discussion at the meeting: 
a. harmonization of vessel records between RFMOs; 
b. coordination of VMS between RFMOs; 
27 
c. harmonization of vessel markings between tuna RFMOs; 
d. catch documentation schemes and other information schemes; 
e. consideration of the work of the High Seas Task Force on IUU Fishing; and 
f. improved controls at a global level of bunker and carrier vessels as a deterrent to 
IUU fishing. 
15.2 Informal Convention Area map 
194. Korea expressed concerns regarding a map depicting the Convention Area, which was 
distributed during WCPFC3. Korea noted that the map does not accurately illustrate maritime 
boundaries in the Convention Area. Korea requested that this map not be further distributed. 
Korea also stated that since maps or any other illustrations reflecting the WCPFC Area of 
Application may be critical in the future stages of the Commission’s work, the Commission, 
its subsidiary bodies, and the Secretariat should exercise caution in producing and distributing 
maps or other illustrations. Chinese Taipei expressed the same concern suggesting that a 
footnote indicating that the maritime boundaries of the EEZs of individual members may not 
represent their actual delimitation be included in future maps to clear any misunderstanding.  
195. The Executive Director advised that the map, and as identified in the footnote, was 
intended to display approximate boundaries only. He advised that CCMs will be consulted 
prior to the preparation of similar material in future.  
15.3 Venue for WCPFC5  
196. The Commission gratefully accepted Korea’s offer to host the 2008 WCPFC Regular 
Session of the Commission.  
AGENDA ITEM 16 — CLOSE OF MEETING 
197. The meeting closed at 9.00 pm on Friday, 15 December 2006.  
